[{"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-01-22-tweedekamer-25.u87", "speech text": "Those are the most essential questions you can ask in this Chamber. We understand that the Minister would come up with a plan, but we were rather surprised that there were also images of what the amount would be. I think, with all the threats out there, it's completely legitimate to invest extra in defense. But what the amounts are, of course, we will not see until spring."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-01-22-tweedekamer-25.u103", "speech text": "Yes. What you see is that the Netherlands is a very attractive target. We are one of the most digitized countries. We have the Amsterdam Internet Exchange. If Mr \u00d6zt\u00fcrk says: throw out the internet, throw out the Amsterdam Internet Exchange... 'Cause that's what you're actually asking. Then we're not attractive anymore. I am sure Mr \u00d6zt\u00fcrk will say: we are not going to do that, because we simply have to do our job. Mr. Chairman. This cabinet invests $5 billion in defense. That is a first step after decades of austerity. It is a good start, but it is not enough to meet future challenges. I have just spoken to Mr \u00d6zt\u00fcrk: Europe is prosperous, but militaryly weak. Without the Americans, we are barely able to face Russia, or to defend ourselves against China's advance. You can see that after years, geopolitics is back. The velvet glove of diplomacy needs a fist. We can't do that anymore. It is not for nothing that NATO is asking for more power. The urgency is also great. In 2014, the Prime Minister signed in the previous cabinet to spend 2% of GDP on Defence. The Netherlands is now 1.16%. We're dangling at the bottom of the NATO list. If we don't do something, it won't be much better by 2024. This is damaging to the Netherlands, but it is also damaging to our own security. On Christmas, I read a nice interview with the Prime Minister in the Elsevier. I quote him: 'It is an embarrassment that we do not comply with the NATO standard of 2%. President Donald Trump is often wrong, but here he is. The Netherlands should increase the Defence budget more towards 16 billion.\" I'm quitting my quote. The Prime Minister is about to present this plan to NATO. So can the CDA assume that extra money will be made available with the Spring Note, now that the Prime Minister attaches his own soul and salvation to this plan? That will agreement was first a promise, a desire to grow to 2%. In October, NATO's top boss indicated that it had become a requirement. That means 7 billion for the Netherlands. I will be honest: the 7 billion will not be added now. But hopefully we can take a step. Other countries won't make it either. Hence my question, which Mrs Karabulut has also asked. Over the last few weeks, there have been several reports in the newspaper that Trump has said that he has really threatened to leave NATO. What are the chances of this happening? Mr President, I come to a conclusion. Defence Ministers will discuss the submitted national plans on 5 and 6 February 2019. So they're gonna argue about those plans, but when will the official offer take place? Because that letter says the Prime Minister has to offer that plan. What if it turns out that NATO said in that first discussion in February: the Netherlands, that plan is not really enough? Is there going to be a new national plan? Thank you, Mr. Chairman."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-01-22-tweedekamer-25.u249", "speech text": "Anyway, we have to think long ways. That's what we wrote down in the Defence Note. Look, defense is always something of long-term thinking. In fact, we indicated in the Defence Paper that we would re-evaluate by 2020. And we're starting the process now. We will involve the Chamber, as agreed here in your Chamber, and as we have done in making the Defence Note. And that involves the views of the army, which was also Mr Kerstens' question. That vision is just in line with the Defence Note. The Defence Note was first, then the Army's vision. The ambitions and goals contained therein are also in line with this. So it is actually a further development of the frameworks. We've put the frameworks in the Defence Note, and they're being worked out. Honestly, I'm glad the Army did. You may have been somewhat surprised, but the army has given all sorts of reports about it. You're invited to the trial. And that is what we have to do, because that safety environment is constantly changing; that is what we see. As a DOD, we need to be able to anticipate that again. So the thinking will never stop. This means that we are really going to work out the long lines to the future in the recalibrate. That's the step we're taking. That is a first investment, but we also need to indicate how we are going to make these follow-up investments."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-01-22-tweedekamer-25.u279", "speech text": "The reason we are also discussing this today is that we are also talking about other important investments. The people have been waiting since 2017, and now since 2018, for those fine words from the Defence Note to be expressed. The Minister says that there was some sort of agreement on 4 October, but apparently it was not, because there is nothing there. I am in favour of a high degree of urgency, the same urgency that has resulted in five priorities for additional equipment being purchased for the staff. I don't know what's wrong with it. That is why I repeat my suggestion: otherwise arrange a mediator, but make it work as soon as possible, because nobody gets happy about this. The minister does all kinds of things to get the armed forces in order, and the defense does all kinds of things, but people end up looking at their paychecks and thinking, \"How can it take so long?\" When will we get the recognition we need? If the Minister does not do it because the people deserve it, then she must do it because otherwise the armed forces will run against the ten thousand vacancies, so that we instantly no longer have a military force at all."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-01-22-tweedekamer-4.u6", "speech text": "In the first question, Mrs Ploumen put a number of things side by side that cannot actually be put side by side. She says that the fact that a hack has taken place, as announced by the US and the UK, indicates that the 95 million allocated in the Netherlands is not effective. As Mrs Ploumen does not know when which hack has taken place, because the intelligence services must be confidential about it, it is concluded that the 95 million can or cannot play a role in this. Once again, the Chamber can ask any questions it wishes to ask through the Intelligence and Security Services Committee. Then there is the second question: what measures will the cabinet take next? Economic Affairs colleagues have previously informed the Chamber that they are exploring legislation, for example on the protection of telecommunications. There is an extensive cybersecurity centre, as part of the Ministry of Justice and Security, which is also highly appreciated internationally. With the additional investments, not only there but also in a number of ministries in my ministry, additional cyber-diplomats are being adopted and additional training is taking place. We can further improve cyber-defense. I'm afraid that's necessary. Of course, I can't guarantee that you'll get it completely foolproof. This is, of course, generally true in the fight against crime or espionage. I can show that we take the problem very seriously and take action in many places."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-01-22-tweedekamer-4.u14", "speech text": "The annual report of the AIVD specifically mentions China and the Russian Federation. Mr Koopmans is right that other countries or organisations may also be behind cyber attacks. This also means that defense against cyber attacks, but also awareness, not only with the government but also with companies and the public, is of great importance. That is why the services sometimes come out with information to make everyone aware of the measures you need to take."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-01-24-tweedekamer-5.u86", "speech text": "Mr President, I thought it was so fair that Mrs Ouwehand also added her image and that the people could then see that that is not true. She and a small group of others in our society feel that animals are so harmed. They do not want, on principle, livestock farming and will use everything to put animals in a bad light. In words, that is so far, but farmers and their families are regularly threatened and farm heirs are illegally entered, or images are made under false pretenses. That while farmers simply try to earn a living in a legal way and with good care for their animals. Meat and dairy and egg products are also simply found in all supermarkets and are bought by the vast majority of our society. So our farmers must also be able to produce these products without being placed as animal executioners. Mr. Chairman. Premeditated: farmers take care of our food, and without food we can't. We still do not live on tubes of seaweed paste with added minerals and flavourings, and if it is up to me that this is never going to happen, not even by a Paris climate agreement, which is now being used as an argument to put everything related to livestock farming in an evil light again. Our farmers are coming up in defense, Mr President, with words. Even the PBL has had to make adjustments to its publications in response. Unlike many animal activists, farmers do something useful for our society. Within the legal frameworks established in this Chamber, they keep animals with great care. Appreciation for our farmers is in order. They do their work with great passion against a often low income to provide us with food. Mr. Chairman. People have been loving animals for thousands of years. Cows in the peat meadow area have been part of the Netherlands for as long as it exists. Of course, animals are kept different now. I can assure you that it is better now than it was a hundred years ago with stables where the climate is regulated and animals have more freedom of movement. In addition, there is continuous work to keep animals healthy and prevent diseases. The sector itself is working hard on this, as we can see from the sector plan for a vital pig farming and the plan for goat farming for a healthy collection of lambs. Farmers therefore deserve appreciation and protection. What we really need to speak about as a Chamber is those who threaten livestock farmers and their families, those who enter the farmyard under false pretenses or in the middle of the night and those who justify it. We have to be tough on that. With that in mind, I will be tabling a motion to obtain a ruling from the Chamber on this matter. In addition, I ask the Minister about her approach to criminal activists. How are the talks with the Minister of Justice to deal with this very hard, I ask the Minister through the President. Can this also be linked to the cooperation between LTO, POV and police that has recently started? Of course, we must continue to look for ways to improve animal keeping. Among other things, it must be ensured that barn fires do not occur. Stalin fires are a tragedy for the animals, but also a great suffering for the keeper and his family. That is why I welcome the plan of action that the Minister has sent to the Chamber, which has agreed that the most common cause, dysfunctional electrification in existing stables, will be dealt with with with periodic checks or inspections. I also notice today that various parties are calling for farmers to be obliged to do all kinds of things without looking at the payback of investments by farmers and the income for farmers' families. Therefore, the CDA focuses on the role of the government in helping entrepreneurs to reduce barn fires. To this end, in the second term, I am considering a motion asking the Cabinet to identify the rapid detection systems available in the technical premises of livestock farms and the costs involved. I also ask the Cabinet to consider how we can support farmers in this with a financial move in the back. I should now like to hear the Minister's response to the proposal that I would like to put in a motion in second place. The government agreement and the agricultural vision state that there must be a better income model for farmers. Let us, as a chamber, take the lead in this and make this possible. Thank you."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-01-29-tweedekamer-27.u61", "speech text": "If that's how you treat your defense personnel, I can also imagine a lot of people leaving. But I would first like to read a letter to see if it is really necessary to have a debate."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-01-29-tweedekamer-30.u56", "speech text": "So that's it at that point. I had stayed with the questions about the ministry's actions when it became clear that it went wrong. At what time was the first notice known to the Ministry that the agreement was broken that Dutch goods were not used in battle? When was that known to the Ministry and why wasn't it immediately decided to stop deliveries? How is it that in the technical briefings the Ministry indicates to the Chamber that everything is being monitored and that nothing is going on, while in the wobbled documents it has long been shown that the equipment was used in the battle? Then I ask questions about the advice that was in the Ministry's possession. What external opinions have been requested and which have not yet been shared with the Chamber? I would then like to ask about the human rights violations, the possible human rights violations by a rebel group supported by the Netherlands, I have to say here officially. Has a Dutch-supported group shot at the Kurdish district of Sheikh Maqsoud in Aleppo or not with so-called dumb Hamim rockets, which make no distinction between civilians and warriors? Did a group supported by the Netherlands use poison gas in that Kurdish district? Can the Minister assure us that the groups supported by the Netherlands were not involved in the attacks on the Kurdish residential area of Aleppo? I'm saying this because Amnesty International reported back in 2016, and also announced to the Ministry, that a number of groups were in the process of attacking that residential neighborhood with those stupid missiles. Amnesty International talks about Jabhat al-Shamiya, the Brigade of Sultan Murad, the Nour al-Din al-Zenki battalions and Brigade 13. Are these groups supported by the Netherlands? If so, Amnesty International said in 2016 that these groups were working on this. Then what was done with it from the Ministry? That Amnesty International report has been dealt with here in the Chamber and Minister Koenders has spoken shamefully of these matters. Finally, on what the Minister himself said and wrote about the documents. The WOB documents on page 59, Part 13, state that the civil character of the above-mentioned equipment is without prejudice to the fact that the use of the equipment does not necessarily have to be of a civil nature. Does the Minister agree with us that this means that you accept that the delivered goods can not be used for civil purposes? And finally, how do you explain the shift of the ministry in the response? In the debate on 2 October, the Minister says, on a question from our group, that the supply agreement states 'no use for war purposes'. But in the answer to the parliamentary questions last week, the Minister says: the delivery conditions allowed for the non-offensive use. So first it was not allowed to be used in battle, but now only not offensive but in defense. Then where's the difference? The Minister says that we have intensified deliveries in connection with the fight against ISIS. ISIS was expelled from Northern Syria in early 2017."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-01-29-tweedekamer-5.u13", "speech text": "I notice there's some sort of cover-up culture in the defense, a cover-up culture. It's about human lives, it's about our soldiers, it's about our own people. What exactly are you going to do to stop this game of words and break away from the culture of cover-up and cover-up?"}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-02-07-tweedekamer-10.u2", "speech text": "Mr. Chairman. Today, we are talking about what we have built up in the Netherlands and the European Union in terms of security and prosperity and how we can maintain and increase it in the future. The world around us is unstable. Brexit, Russia, the Middle East, migration from Africa, and China, which is moving more and more. In this unstable world, we are increasing our prosperity and security in the European Union, because we are a relatively small country with 17 million out of 500 million inhabitants, and we make a lot of money in the European Union with our exports. This leads to economic growth, jobs and tax revenues, from which we can pay our care and pensions. At the same time, support for the EU has increased in the Netherlands. This support is strong, but it is also fragile, as the Social and Cultural Planning Bureau has shown. The Dutch know well that we are benefiting from the European Union. They feel it is a necessity, but it is not the case that they are dragging EU flags through the streets. The VVD shares this realistic view. I'll get to the Brexit. The Brexit shows that nexit is not a good idea. British society has been divided to the bone. The British Parliament does not know exactly how it intends to shape the Brexit. And while Brexit hasn't even taken place, the pound has already fallen in value, British purchasing power has fallen by almost 20% and companies are leaving the UK. So you shouldn't want a nexit as the Netherlands. That is why I would like to ask the next parties in Parliament, as far as they are present, because there is already one missing, how they see next and how exactly they should, because the British do not know that. So I'm gonna draw them out a little bit. The Dutch interest is paramount for the VVD. This means working with EU Member States without seeking a superstate at EU level. As far as we are concerned, the EU should focus on the major cross-border concerns that countries cannot solve themselves. I call it climate, security and migration. I also call it the completion of the internal market. I told you, we export a lot, but there can be a little bit more on top of that, so that we can make more money from it, which we can all benefit from. And keep it practical, too. People have more to gain from the abolition of roaming charges and judicial cooperation than from grand visions. That brings me to the rule of law. The rule of law is under attack in a number of EU countries, including Poland and Hungary. That's what hits us right away. Dutch judges no longer hand over suspects to Poland. And that will compromise our safety. Why? Because Polish judges are no longer independent enough. That's impossible, isn't it? Does the government want to appeal to Poland about this? And then Hungary. It is absurd that the Hungarian Government does not want to participate in a visit by a fellow EU Member State to that country. 'Cause what's going on out there is affecting all of us, and we have to work together, right? We all benefit from that. The Netherlands also pays to the European budget and that money goes back to Hungary. So I'd like a response from the cabinet. It says here, \"Don't pronounce, lead to further escalation.\" I will not, but I see the Hungarian ambassador and he knows exactly what I mean. Then \"a deal is a deal.\" Instead of more European Union, we would like countries to stick to the agreement, for example the Growth and Stability Pact. Countries can easily get away with violating these criteria on a budget deficit. This is not good for the stability of the euro and therefore not good for the Dutch interest. Because this stability of the euro contributes to prosperity and jobs. The Commission must show courage and say something about it. Then you see two things in the European Commission. They have many tasks at the same time, they have to assess and enforce the budget. You can see that in competition too. They make the laws and they have to enforce them; Mrs. Vestager. Is that desirable? Shouldn't you cut that? Here in the Netherlands we also have an independent supervisor, the Competition Authority, now the ACM? Shouldn't that also be at European level? Then we also have the spitzen candidate. The current President, Juncker, from Luxembourg, calls himself 'a political Commission', but is that wise? Are you still the objective, neutral guardian of the treaties? We don't think so. Therefore, my question to the cabinet: would you like to ensure that a next Commission is working on the separation of functions? I mentioned the Stability and Growth Pact. And don't you want to join us in that spitzen-candidate trial? The Treaty states that the European Council is sitting there, Prime Minister Rutte, who should be President of the Commission, taking into account the results of the European Parliament, and may then say yes or no to the European Parliament. Let us keep it that way, so that we do not have another political chairman, because that is not in the Dutch interest. Then defense. We were in Brussels last week with a number of colleagues. That was a good visit, but then you see that more and more defence tasks are gradually going to the European Commission: a European Defence Fund, a peace facility. There's even talk of a defense commissioner. Now the cabinet says that it has to be intergovernmental, so Heads of Government need to talk about this and not the Commission, simply put. How is this cabinet going to counter this tendency on the part of the Commission to attract things? Finally, I come to new allies. The European Union, like the Binnenhof, is a political marketplace. There you have to wheel and deal, you don't get your way everywhere, but you have to negotiate smart and tough. The Prime Minister's nodding. We have also seen this with the Minister of Finance, who created a so-called Hanseatic coalition to protect our interests in the euro. How does the Netherlands do that? That leads me to two questions. Are we capable of creating change if we want to make alliances? Secondly, if that is the case and if we want to achieve something in concrete terms and lead coalitions, then perhaps we should not take too fast a position in the European Union, not because we are vague, but precisely because we want to achieve something and lead a coalition? Can the Prime Minister and the Foreign Minister say anything about what building a coalition in Europe means?"}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-02-07-tweedekamer-10.u341", "speech text": "Let's get back to defense. I was talking about a possible Defense Commissioner. I believe that the cabinet is also seeing this problem coming, because there is a rather cryptic phrase about cooperation in the state of the Union. I am curious to see what is meant by the sentence I am now reading: 'In this context, the Cabinet considers it important to consider how best to implement a forward-looking agenda for security and defence in Europe, both politically and institutionally.' What's this all about?"}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-02-13-tweedekamer-6.u12", "speech text": "It seems that several spokesmen have now come up with this as a line of defense: 'there is now a consultation'. Maybe I'll respond to it before we hear it four or five more times."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-03-12-eerstekamer-11.u19", "speech text": "Thank you, Mr President. On behalf of the Group of the European People's Party (Christian Democrats) and European Democrats, I would like to thank Mr Koopmans and Mr Van Helvert and all the supporters who have contributed and contributed. All this work makes an initiative law more exception than rule. Hence our respect for and thanks to the proposers. I wish them good luck. With this initiative they have addressed a current and pressing problem: the global increase in piracy at sea. Not only off the coast of East Africa, but also in East Asia, South America and West Africa. Our merchant navy is right to call on the government to provide protection, as is the case with all countries affected by piracy. However, the military lacks people and means to fulfil all tasks at once. In addition, procedures are too lengthy, the costs are too high, or there is no suitable space on board the ships to be protected. The Marines are doing their utmost, but supply and demand of protection are not sufficiently compatible. To meet this, the proposers propose to involve private maritime security officers operating under the supervision of the government. This would constitute an infringement of the State's monopoly of violence. This monopoly is on good grounds. The government must maintain the rule of law. In some cases, violence cannot be avoided, but this exercise of violence must be under democratic control and violence must be reserved for staff who are directly subordinate to the government. Usually they're military and police officers. Leaving violence to citizens creates the risk of too much violence or playing a judge of their own. In the case of pirates, the monopoly of violence is inadequate. The state doesn't provide enough protection. However, that does not relieve the same government of its responsibility towards the merchant navy. Her duty of care continues, even if it is not fulfilled or not fulfilled. That forces the search for alternatives. Because doing nothing is not an option. Do we accept piracy against Dutch ships? That would mean crime pays off. Victims would continue to fall and the home front and crews would remain in fear. The merchant navy and our economy would suffer a great deal of damage. Therefore, the need for armed action remains after all non-violent protection measures have been developed. Alternatively, the removal of the economic motives of the pirates has been mentioned. Intensifying development cooperation with coastal states could lead to a reduction in piracy. Our country has a balanced and careful international policy and with success. But a policy aimed at improving economic structures is a long-term issue. This is going to take too long, while piracy is a topical problem that requires a direct solution. Another alternative is offered by this bill. The government doesn't have to do everything with its own staff. Many public authorities are entrusted to private companies under the supervision of the government. Security tasks can also be transferred to private individuals when it comes to execution. However, it must be ensured that the performance by private individuals meets the same requirements as the performance by the public authorities: the same procedure, regulation, authorisation, certification, control and supervision. Then there should be no predominantly objection to transfer to private individuals, as long as those individuals have the form of quasi-government. The risks of this proposal have been highlighted in the House of Representatives. First of all, the risk that civil security will be preferred to military, because civil security can work faster and cheaper. This danger would be real if shipowners had a free choice. But there is no free choice. The Minister decides and does so on the basis of the principle \"VPD, unless.\" Another risk is that more protection also means more violence. In itself, that's right. That's exactly the point, you might say. Private maritime security fills the gaps that are now falling. And that's not a risk as long as their M.O. is the same as VPD's. Civil security is second best, but that's better than nothing. There is also a risk that civilian security would use violence faster than military VPDs. The best practices do not provide an argument for this. Citizen guards are regulated and controlled. They are covered by the same Public Prosecutor's Office as the military. A valid argument is that costs should not play a decisive role in the choice of force. That choice is made by the Minister. A separate permit is required for each transport. It covers all aspects, not just the financial aspects. The starting point remains: \"VPD, unless.\" Madam President. Finally, my group has two questions. First of all, the storm. The criminal justice system has a comprehensive regulation of the storm. To what extent does this bill regulate the same thing as the doctrine of self-defense does? Are we doing double work? Or are there elements of civil security that are not subject to storms, such as preparatory measures? In his letter, the Minister announced a reflection on storms. Maybe he'd like to lift a tip of the veil by now, as a try-out. Our second question concerns the bodycams. If force has been used, the captain will send the bodycams to the state's attorney's office. The prosecution may decide to prosecute a private security guard on the basis of the images and sound recordings. To what extent could this conflict with the principle that no one has to cooperate in their own condemnation? All in all, my group believes that the monopoly of violence should not be understood in absolute terms. The government may transfer tasks to others. Justification for this is the duty of care of the State. If the government fails to do so, mandating is allowed under the condition of proper regulation and control. This bill provides for this. We look forward with interest to answering our questions."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-03-12-eerstekamer-11.u30", "speech text": "Thank you, Mr. Chairman. With this bill, the initiators, first Mr Ten Broeke and Mr Knops, and now Mr Koopmans and Mr Van Helvert, are trying to offer the Dutch merchant ships more security in the foreign. That's what's good for them. On behalf of my group, I would like to congratulate the initiators on the fact that at least they have already made it so far that they can defend the bill here. With this proposal they are addressing an important problem that requires solutions. However, it is the question, at least for my group, whether the solution put forward is the right one. The proposal to give private parties the power to use force to avert the risk of piracy affects a fundamental principle of the Dutch State: the government's monopoly on violence. The initiators follow the view of the De Wijkerslooth committee that the monopoly of violence is not an absolute principle. They argue that the right to violence may be transferred under conditions to others. The initiators believe that this is possible if the government is unable to comply adequately with its duty of care for merchant ships under the Dutch flag. As far as our group is concerned, this reasoning is rather short-sighted. We will go into that further and we hope today to get a little more depth from the initiators themselves around their support. In addition, we would like a clearer picture of how the need for private security has been secured with this bill. In my speech, I first focus on a technical aspect of the legislative proposal itself, and the tension between the VPD principle and the so-called level-playing field standard. Afterwards I briefly deal with the captain's overriding authority and the connection of this bill with the role and task of Defense. I'll start with the design of the bill. As the SP said in the written debate, it is an unfinished proposal, given the delegation provisions for drafting the legislative proposal in lower regulation. The initiators deny this and stress that delegation provisions are \"useful, advisable and customary\" without prejudice to the \"clearness and overseeability\" of the legislative proposal. My group does not entirely follow this line of reasoning. The amended proposal of the law covers only eight pages. So there could have been a bit more effect on this. But much more importantly, it is precisely in the AMvBs that crucial issues will be dealt with that affect the proportionality and feasibility of the legislative proposal. This undermines the supervisory role of this Chamber, i.e. on the spot, in the handling of the legislative proposal. This is not for the benefit of the plenary. But it also becomes more difficult afterwards, because in the case of an AMvB, it is always difficult for a parliament to have sufficient control over what it will look like in the end. I would like to mention two examples which are set out in more detail and which may be objections. As a first example, I refer to Article 4 (2) (a) and (b), which provides that the Minister of JenV determines at AMvB a number of nautical miles and a percentage of additional costs for a planned transport. On the basis of those criteria, a shipowner may rely on private security rather than a VPD. The government has now indicated its intention to determine with such an AMvB that such a VPD would not be 20% more expensive, or that a merchant ship would not have to travel more than 100 miles. This has just been memorized. This to facilitate a level playing field for Dutch merchants. My group fears a sliding scale, where less stringent regulated private security may operate in other countries at a cheaper and unlicensed cost. We now know the intention of such an AMvB. It may take shape in this way, but can also be changed afterwards. Nor can this bill ensure that merchant ships will not reflagged on the spot market on the basis of cost considerations. That flagging was one of the main arguments for this bill, and one of its main assumptions. With such a competition, which is likely to continue, even after the adoption of this bill, the criteria of 20% and 100 miles may be further put under pressure. All in all, there is a significant risk of ever less use of VPDs in this way. In replying to the PvdA's questions on this subject, the Government does not, by definition, raise legal or economic objections. In my group's view, this is contrary to the VPD principle, unless it is based on conditional outsourcing of the monopoly of violence. In our view, that is an inconsistency. We would like to hear how the government and initiators look at this. A second example is Article 8, in which the Minister of JenV at AMvB lays down detailed rules on the specific means of violence to be used and their storage. Here too, the stability of the future is cited as a reason to deviate from the Belgian modality, where these aspects are very strict, much more stringent. Although there is talk of \"transferring the force monopoly under conditions,\" the legislative proposal only seems to require a step-by-step approach and the use of force as an ultimatum remedium. Are these indeed all the conditions, apart from the criteria of 20% and 100 miles, and if not, which others can be imposed? And most importantly, how can they be secured? Will we also be able to assess this in more detail in an evaluation? I'm on the overriding authority. The written procedure has already mentioned two captains on one ship or, more precisely, team leader and captain. The NVKK says that there is \"permanent and structural consultation\" between team leader and captain. If it turns out that protection measures have not averted the danger, then only consultation between team leader and captain is necessary for the use of the violence. There is expressly no need for the captain's consent to the team leader for the use of force. According to the NVKK, there can be \"no difference of opinion\" on the imminent threat of piracy. On the one hand, the government is therefore talking about a captain's overriding authority, in accordance with Regulation 8, Chapter XI-2 of the annex to the SOLAS Convention. According to the government, a situation can previously arise that the captain and the team leader disagree about the threat of piracy and the use of violence. The captain will have the last word. On the other hand, the NVKK only mentions this as a theoretical possibility. According to the NVKK, it is unthinkable that the captain should use this. After all, he has \"no sense\" of violence and will not want to do so. So despite SOLAS recording the captain's overriding authority, in practice many flag states and contracts between shipping companies and private security companies deviate from this. It is often stated in contracts that in grave life-or-death situations the right to self-defense outweighs the captain's overriding authority. Apologies for all those English words, so it's about situations of life or death. Although there would therefore be no inconsistency in the legislative proposal, there seems to be some ambiguity about the responsibilities on board, which is not clarified by the legislative proposal. My group wonders how private security officers will interpret their right to self-defense in practice, and whether this interpretation will be appropriate and not too broad. Are the responsibilities of captain on the one hand and team leader on the other, both clear and sufficiently secured in this bill? And is this really not a derogation from the SOLAS Convention? I'd like a response from both the initiators and the minister. Mr President, I will conclude. As far as my group is concerned, it is clear that merchant ships in the ocean are extremely vulnerable to piracy. As far as we are concerned, these merchant ships must be kept in mind, but not from the heart. This duty of care is important to us. But it's not so much based on a fear of reflagging. I think there are quite a few assumptions behind that fear. All you have to do is read Wikipedia to see what it's worth. There are many other reasons for this: economic reasons, taxes, cheaper operations, scrapping licences, quota hopping, etc. So I would not dare to say: we need this and we will avoid flagging. There are other reasons for that. Moreover, I have just referred to that race to the bottom in order to make it as cheap as possible. This will also put pressure on our criteria that we want to set. That race to the bottom will continue with this bill."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-03-12-eerstekamer-11.u95", "speech text": "Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The contribution of the D66 Group to this debate begins with the observation that the amended draft has been substantially modified in several areas. A lot of pieces have been exchanged in preparation. I also agree with the compliments for the many work that has been done. You think that's a ritual, but it's serious. I would like to add a compliment on the thorough and detailed answer we have given to the questions we have put in this House. My group's review will focus on the question of legality. Of course, it is always the case that when you get the floor as an eighth speaker, a number of subjects have already been dealt with by colleagues, but I would add a number of points. Hugo de Groot has already been mentioned. Free passage on seas is a right. Obstacles along the way are often referred to as \"piracy.\" That's very old, too. Nor does it go away, and it has not left Somalia in the Gulf of Aden for the last ten years. Prealabel, I note that international law, we call Hugo de Groot, but we are talking about international law, and cannot be conclusive in its answer to the question that is at the heart of today's debate, namely whether the legislator should allow armed private security officers to sit on board Dutch merchant ships for self-defense. That really is a question that needs to be answered on the basis of Dutch law. And that's not such an easy question. The request for security of the shipowners flying the Dutch flag was raised because an obvious security question had arisen. I've already mentioned Somalia. The request is also legitimate, because shipowners are simply entitled to protection. That is also the conclusion of the De Wijkerslooth Committee, which has been mentioned several times today: the monopoly on the exercise of violence is a state monopoly, including in international waters. However, the key question is whether, and if so, how those activities could also be delegated, in part, to specific organisations on the basis of the law. The said committee considered that question in principle negative. She said that if there were to be another solution, the State should be the first to borrow it. I note that this has not happened, but I ask, just to be sure, whether the current situation is still that the State does not lend. I shall come back later to the conclusions of the De Wijkerslooth Committee. I will concentrate on five aspects in answering this key question. Is it a matter of principle, or is it also a matter of pragmatism? Can you look at it pragmatically? 'Cause can't it just be taken off with a \"no\"? It's like, \"It's state monopoly, ready.\" Despite the firm conclusion of the De Wijkerslooth Committee, the Ministry of Defence proved to have a capacity limitation for this state task, for this monopoly task. For example, I understand from the exchange of documents and from the information we have received from stakeholders that this has been the case for many years. But it goes up and down: sometimes there are more, and sometimes there are fewer. My group is very difficult to deal with in the budgetary and strategic reasons why there is this capacity limitation. It will have to do with job vision, with priorities, with money for Defense. Perhaps there is also an extreme geographical limit to making available, which also plays a part in this. However, as long as these are reasonable requests, for example through the Suez Canal and around Aden off the coast of Somalia, and they do not see on the experimental voyage for exploration, but on commercial voyages, you would think that they should still be able to be met. The Vessel Protection Detachments, the VPDs, have been passed a few times. That is a provision that has been developed and offered to the shipowners who are requesting it, but I understand that there are problems. Mr Vlietstra has also asked for this in the written documents. I understand that there are about 175 VPDs listed in the Defence budget with an average unit of 11 soldiers. They're operationally operational. We just mentioned the norm of eleven. I understand that that is a defence standard of its own and not an international standard. It has also been said today that this standard is not applicable to small ships. They just can't be accommodated on board. So that's an offer that's not congruent with demand. Is this indeed still the situation? I read that it could be less than four, but I'm slightly confused as to what the norm is. And that's important to determine if there's a supply that connects to a demand. I understand that there was a capacity limitation, which prevented the Ministry from meeting the entire demand. That does not seem to be the biggest bottleneck anymore, but there is still an operational speed that can be a limitation. It seems to be taking too long. So you could say: the judge is available, but not de facto. Looking at the Wijkerslooth report, I notice that this was discussed in 2016. A VPD framework letter has been written, but apparently it has not been adequately resolved. Otherwise, we wouldn't be standing here. If there is sufficient capacity and sufficient speed, then there is still the demand of the costs. Are the costs prohibitive or not? And what is that: prohibitive? I would like to ask the authors whether they would like to discuss these three elements of the analysis and whether they can advise me on the actual status and the way in which we should look at this and whether, on that basis, you should, in the opinion of the proposers, break that monopoly. I have listened to Mr Strik's statement of principle and I am very much in favour of it. There is another question of principle. If the State itself does not fulfil its monopoly sufficiently and says \"you can hire me at that cost and at that time,\" and if that is not congruent with the question, you could say that there is a duty of care from the State that may be abandoned. Then I think you should look at whether it is still so fundamentally incorrect under those circumstances. I read in the documents that the Minister does not find this a fundamental dilemma in his own answer to the questions. I think that's different from his predecessors, but I've read that. I'd like to hear if that's true."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-03-12-eerstekamer-13.u7", "speech text": "Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I see that not much has changed since 25 years ago. One of the largest members was of course Hugo de Groot. His name has already been mentioned. What has not yet been mentioned is that in 1604 he was commissioned to write the work De iure praedae, about the rightful spoilt, about the way in which the government under conditions could give private navigators the right to use force at sea. And yes, it has been mentioned: the book that came from it is Mare liberum, about the international law of the sea. It was the legal basis for the Dutch merchant navy and thus also for a large part of our prosperity. The rich decoration of this room bears witness to that. The same shipping is now threatened by piracy. That's what we're talking about today. With your permission, President, I will address the questions that have been asked about the need for this bill, about the monopoly of violence and the relationship with the De Wijkerslooth report and about the principle of 'VPD, unless'. I will deal with the deployment and size of the VPDs, the cost of private security, the right to self-defense and the question whether this is sufficient. I will address questions about the relationship between the captain and the team leader, about the reporting obligations of that captain and team leader and, finally, about evidence gathering and the place in the potential conviction."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-03-12-eerstekamer-13.u9", "speech text": "I've already had most of it, Mr. Chairman. Mr Van Helvert will discuss the operation of the right to self-defense, the use of bodycams, the use of force, supervision and justice in other countries and the AMvB and any other subjects. Many have asked questions about the need for this bill. I would like to say that piracy is increasing again. The 2018 figures show that 201 ships have been victims, compared to 180 in the previous year. 143 ships have been boarded. There's been 18 shellings. 241 times there has been violence against crew members and there have been 141 hostages and 83 kidnappings. This also affects Dutch ships. It has already been recalled by Mr Dercksen: last year a ship with our flag was attacked in Nigeria and eleven people were kidnapped. It was only after a month that they were released. So piracy is increasing and spreading. The danger is not limited to only Somalia and East Africa, but the danger is now also greater off the coast of Nigeria, on the other side of Africa, on Indonesia, the Philippines, Bangladesh, Venezuela and in many other places. Mr Kuiper asked whether this bill is now specifically aimed at Somalia and that neighborhood. No, it's comprehensive as far as it can be. That is why it is very flexible. However, the need for this law has been given, regardless of wave movements in global piracy. Some of us, as the Netherlands, could perhaps be less affected. Mrs Vlietstra spoke about this, for example, because there are anti-piracy missions in a particular area or because other countries do have private security guards and pirates are deterred. It may also be because ships simply no longer fly our flag. In any case, this is a permanent threat to our Dutch ships and primarily our sailors, who are at great risk. But think also of the home front, which lives in fear and worries about the safe return of their father, their mother, their family. Think also of terrorism financed by this piracy and destabilising the local environment. Of course, think also of the damage to free shipping, to our trading fleet, to its position in the world economy and to our country's central position in maritime transport so far. Questions have been asked about Mr Kuiper's reflagging, but also by Mrs Vlietstra and others. Due to these dangers, many ships have been flagged. We know that at least 30 ships have been flagged out in five recent years, but we will never know which new ships have never been flying a Dutch flag because this law does not yet exist. Mr Ruers has asked how the economic damage can be estimated and where we get the figures. Of course, the first is the human damage to the passengers and the home front, but it is also about the economic damage. The World Bank calculated in 2013 that in that period the world economy lost 18 million euros annually due to piracy. What the precise damage is for the Dutch merchant, we cannot know. It is not possible to estimate what assignments might have been given if this law, which is good protection, had already been in place. It is also too easy to say that shipowners have to go around or leave an assignment. It is often not a single assignment, but a whole series of assignments."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-03-12-eerstekamer-13.u36", "speech text": "I fully understand that and I fully understand Mrs Vlietstra's question. We are all curious how that will work in the end. However, I think we all recognise that the problems of piracy exist and are very flexible throughout the world. The use of security guards must therefore also depend very much on which ship there is and what the circumstances are. There are so many different factors that the authors of this bill did not want to pretend that they could already foresee it. We would very much like to submit some more secret market data, but unfortunately that is not possible. I have a bit of an understanding for that. Then I come to Mr Schouwenaar's question as to whether the right to self-defense is simply sufficient. Now, of course, anyone who commits violence, and I quote from the law, 'which is provided by the necessary defence of one's own body, honorability or good against immediately unlawful sexual assault', is not punishable. That's the right to self-defense. But this law is trying to go a little further. The crew of a merchant ship that violently resists a pirate attack can rely on that storm. This means that they may not be punishable, even if they are using a weapon that should not have been on board. But it is not enough to use that profession. We are talking here about the anticipating effect, the anticipating defence against potential violence. So not the moment that burglar comes into your house. You're going to sail in an area where you know there's a risk. We want this to happen, and I hear that in the Chamber too. We want all the conditions and conditions arranged and discussed in advance as much as possible. That's why we're talking about certification, about quality standards, about that regulation, about the agreements between captain and team leader, all that sort of thing. That is why we are going a little further than just the right to self-defense, although it is always essential for the safety of people. I hope I have answered that. I'd like to hear it if I have to explain it further. I'm pretty good at the end. I come to the relationship between the captain and the team leader and the decision-making power. Mrs Lokin-Sassen and Mrs Strik, among others, have asked questions about this. Is it true that the team leader ultimately has the decision-making power? The answer to that is absolutely no. The captain has the transcendent decision-making power. There's only one captain on the ship. That should always be clear. By the way, the relationship between the captain and the team leader, as this bill is trying to lay down, is exactly the same as the relationship that already exists between the captain and the leader of the VPD. It's an exact copy. We are not trying to change that in any way. Probably a plethora: primary responsibility for the use of violence lies with the team leader of the security team. The team leader is in command, not the captain. But the captain always keeps that transcendent decision-making power, the overriding authority, as stated in the SOLAS Convention. That means that if the captain and the team leader disagree, the captain always has the last word. So basically, after consulting the captain, the team leader has the right to decide; after consulting the captain. For the sake of clarity, if such consultation is not possible, in an extreme situation, the team leader may act directly. That's why he came aboard. But the captain remains the boss. If he does not want the security team to take action, or if he thinks, for example, that there is excessive violence at the time when the action is already taking place, then the captain can say so and the team leader will have to accept it, because there is always only one captain on the ship. Mr. Chairman. Then I come to the reporting obligations. Among other things, Mrs Lokin-Sassen asked for that. It is true that there are quite a lot of reporting obligations. This is necessary to monitor. The precise obligations are set out in Article 12 of the bill. The captain and the team leader each make a report after each transport and send it to the minister. In those reports, they shall indicate whether violence has been used. If that is the case, they also send images and sound material. In addition, there is a reporting obligation for the master, because at the time of use of force at least, as soon as possible thereafter, the master must report the use of force to the Public Prosecutor's Office. So at that moment we are still sailing in pirate territory. Those images and sound recordings will also be included. By the way, we, the initiators, did not come up with that on our own. A similar reporting obligation already applies to all offences committed on board a ship. That is stated in Article 439h of the Code of Criminal Procedure. Let me say a few words about the recordings of images and sounds. Mr Schouwenaar asked whether this would not be a mandatory contribution to his own conviction. The answer to that is \"no.\" This is a targeted application of the usual observation. The use of images and sound recordings also takes place in other professions where violence can be used. I am thinking of F-16 pilots, who are also always recording images and sounds, and of some police officers, who, in certain circumstances, are recording them. Under Article 11 (5) of the bill, there will be an AMvB at least, if you vote in favour, which further elaborates the rules for the use of those cameras and the meaning of that material."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-03-12-eerstekamer-13.u74", "speech text": "Yeah, I'll work them all out. I certainly did not intend to stay away from an answer to Mr Backer's question. I understand the point and the concern that, if there is not enough money, we might say again: now we are going to do it up nicely. That is why I say that we must take a critical look at what is now a reasonable price, also in the light of the'market development'. And that brings me to Mr Ruers' point: what is the offer of private security at that time? But that has to be addressed in the evaluation. At present, this is at least the relatively low price compared to the one in the past. Well, let's at least be happy about that. I find Mr Ruers' question very difficult. It was also discussed in the House of Representatives. There is a certain discrepancy between what the Vessel Protection Detachments should minimally contain in the defense's opinion, and how private security deploys it. And I also indicated myself that there is some difference in the whole package that is being adopted. I have just outlined that such a VPD also has very clear quality requirements, for example on the 360o observation itself 24/7. In addition, no more tasks are given to the crew or anything like that. Those are the quality requirements of the Defense Department, and that is the minimum that matters at the time. Mr Schouwenaar asked if I could give a hint of the veil..."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-03-12-eerstekamer-13.u100", "speech text": "Thank you, Mr President. I would like to thank the initiators and the Minister for their comprehensive reply. I can see that there is indeed a difference in the appreciation of the government's monopoly of violence. In my first term, I indicated that, as far as we are concerned, this belongs in principle to the government. You're not gonna let that go. At the same time, this also implies a duty of public concern for its citizens wherever they are. It must therefore be possible to comply with it, but I can only imagine that if it is not complied with, there can be... But then you actually lose the principle that it belongs to the government. When I hear the initiators and the minister, they are a little more pragmatic on the one hand in the state of law and on the other hand in the economic arguments which they believe can play a part in deciding whether or not to leave it to others. In my opinion, that is precisely the problem, because it really matters what choices you make when making public capacity available or not. We have talked extensively about the VPD and to what extent it can be made more flexible. This seems to be very difficult and, at the same time, makes the implementation of this VPD principle very dependent on the extent to which it can be adapted to the needs of the sea. From the idea that it may not be ruled out for economic reasons, you are actually opening the door to more competition. This will automatically increase the risk of using private security. That is not a taboo, but it may even be interchangeable. And that becomes more important as VPD isn't really suitable for what it takes. Well, that's where we see the big problem. That became even clearer when we talked to the Minister about these permits and the demands they make. The law clearly indicates how the set of standards and rules for these security companies are set at AMvB. The minister says, \"We don't know how we're gonna fill that out yet.\" My question is who is going to draw it up. We've heard, \"Defense sets standards for the VPDs.\" It also actually determines how flexible it can be. I cannot imagine that we are going to set different standards in that set of standards and rules that the government uses for itself. I would therefore like to have a little more clarity about this, perhaps from the Minister rather than from the initiators. We shouldn't be taking double standards. So I would like to clarify that a little bit. Another point I would like to put to Mr Koopmans is the overriding authority. In fact, Mr Koopmans admitted that it is not always the captain who has the last word, but if you listen carefully to the story, it almost seems as if he is the overriding authority in particular with regard to adjacent matters, and not so much with regard to the use of violence itself. I had mentioned some quotes in the first term. I would like to come back to that. It is a quote from the NVKK. He says explicitly: there is no permission from the captain to the team leader for the use of violence. The NVKK also says that the last word of the captain is actually a theoretical possibility. In their view, it is inconceivable that the captain should make use of it, because he does not understand the use of force. The NVKK says that even in contracts it is stated that in matters of life and death the right to self-defense outweighs overriding authority. So I'd like to have that mirror. The initiator has already indicated that there is a need for consultation. But can he give us a more precise description of what that overriding authority is in, really when it comes to violence? Or is it just about other kinds of decisions related to them? Mr. Chairman. We have talked about making VPDs flexible as an alternative, but we have also explicitly asked to examine other alternatives. One of the things I'd like to give you is this. In Somalia, you can see very clearly that emptying the sea was one of the causes that started it all. Fishermen lost their income as a result. Is that something that is being looked at, perhaps by the initiators or by the minister? Is it being considered to what extent international agreements can combat these kinds of causes? Mr. Chairman. Finally, I have a question about international cooperation. I can imagine that if all countries want to protect their populations, they can also agree together on what they are using their maritime capacity on. Mr Ruers and I have also spoken about this. The Minister mentions a number of EU initiatives, but I read that those operations are those to which one country provides ten and the other four military. This is of a much more limited nature than when Member States or countries jointly make structural agreements to secure their own ships through military forces. This could actually lead to a pool, which would significantly increase capacity. Hopefully, the Minister will be able to indicate what efforts are being made in this area. Thank you."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-03-12-eerstekamer-3.u31", "speech text": "Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First of all, I would like to congratulate the initiator, Mr Verhoeven, on being able to defend his bill in the Upper House today. Quite an achievement that bears witness to a lot of perseverance. The bill aims, at least in its original intent, to ensure a complete equivalence of insulting the King with communal insults. The ban on majesty desecration should be removed. This initial objective of the legislative proposal brings me on my own to a first general question. Has the petitioner not seriously considered withdrawing his bill after treatment in the Lower House? Because, let's be honest, after treatment in the House of Representatives, his bill is neither meat nor fish. The Party for Animals will be happy with that, but that cannot apply to Mr Verhoeven. His bill no longer refers to a complete equivalence of majesty desecration with the commune of insults. We are now talking, with all due respect, about some crumbs: the penalty is reduced, the insult of the King must be appealed to communal insults and the grounds for exclusion of communal insults also apply to majesty desecration. Does Mr Verhoeven think that he would later dare to tell his grandchildren with pride, pump and circumcence how he got this bill through the First Chamber? Does he recognize himself in his initial ideals? Mr. Chairman. The kingship stands or falls with the dignity attached to the office. This dignity, the SGP believes, deserves protection and is also served with some mystery, magic and special privileges. I am thinking of the immunity of the King, of various duty-free allowances, of an exception to the rules on funeral care, but also of several civil and criminal regulations. It's all supposed to be, you might say, in our country's choice of a monarchal state. Anyone who looks at this rationally only misses the fact that there are things beyond reason. The love of our royal house in the breadth of our society cannot be separated from the magic of the monarchy either. Within this context also fits very well a special, insulting description of the King's crime. This description of the crime is a symbol of the special position held by the King and the dignity served by it. In addition, a king is in fact defenseless. He cannot defend himself in the same way as ordinary citizens. For that reason, too, a king deserves some extra support and protection, so to speak. The King's position and dignity deserve special protection. That would only be otherwise if there were serious objections to this particular description of the offence, for example an unacceptable restriction of freedom of expression or the impossibility of holding a thorough debate on the royal family. However, there is no such thing. Or can the petitioner make this hard? The initiator will also have seen the responses to his bill by renowned lawyers. I also refer to the article just mentioned by my colleague, Mrs Van Bijsterveld. Doesn't that show that the ban on majesty desecration doesn't in any way create any friction in the area of freedom of expression? What does this say about the purpose of the bill? Is this fear, which is therefore not necessary, for too limited freedom of opinion, or yet secretly a paw of that special position of the Royal House? If there are no problems at all in terms of freedom of expression, why is a particularly criminal protection regime a threat to the initiator? Mr. Chairman. It's campaign time, so allow me. Fine that D66 throws her one crown jewels overboard, but she should not touch the crown jewels of N\u00e9derland. Mr. Chairman. Then I ask the Minister whether, in his view, the insult of the ex-King should not also be regarded as a derivative of majesty. Mrs Van Bijsterveld rightly made this point just now. The existing regulation does not provide for this and neither does the legislative proposal. Isn't this an omission? When Princess Beatrix is heavily offended, this also reflects on the person of the King and on the royal dignity, especially now that Princess Beatrix is and remains so closely attached to the institution of the monarchy. I'd like a response from the Minister to this. Is he willing to restore that legal omission? Finally, I would like to endorse Mr Bikker's intriguing questions about the involvement of our overseas territories in this bill. Hasn't the petitioner overlooked some compatriots in preparing this bill? Mr President, I will conclude. An Dutch party like the SGP does not need this bill. Nevertheless, I look forward with great interest to the answers to my questions. Thank you."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-03-14-tweedekamer-7.u371", "speech text": "Thank you, Madam President. Much has already been said in this area. It is up to me, as the last minister in this period, to outline a little bit about the broader perspective when it comes to the integration portfolio. I think Mrs Westerveld made it clear in her first term that we are dealing occasionally with a split. We can see that, too. Over the last few months, we have talked frequently about problematic behaviour in the integration domain, which is not a criminal offence. If something is punishable, it is in a way clear, because then the prosecution can prosecute. However, we often have to deal with problematic behavior in this area, so behavior that we find undesirable in this country and that we want to do something about, but which is not always the legal instrument for. Against this background, the Cabinet established the Task Force Problematic Behaviour and Unwanted Foreign Financing. It is precisely with this task force that we want to increase the information position of the Empire and the municipalities, and to increase the scope for action of these municipalities. So we want to give instruments to these municipalities to actually do something if they are confronted with problematic behaviour. This is partly also about unwanted foreign financing. We've talked about that recently. But it's wider than that. This is also the answer to a question from Mr Bishop. He asked: what are we doing to give these municipalities more perspective of action and help the mayors? The task force communicates with the municipalities to see exactly what is happening. That's the analysis. But we are also looking together at what instruments they have to intervene with. It can start with a conversation and it can end with disruption, all in an effort to prevent that problematic behavior that we don't want in this country. In addition, it is constantly searching, because precisely because it is not punishable, it remains, of course, a bit of a grey area, I say in my own words. But that task force will help us to support the municipalities. We do that on a broad palette of subjects. They have not only to do with extremism, but also with extreme right-wing behaviour and undermining, for example. That is in response to Mr Bishop's question. Mr Bruins of the Christian Union asked for new legislation in this area, so apart from the field of education that Mr Slob was just talking about. The cabinet is, of course, working on a number of laws. The Civil Code, article 2:20, has been around a number of times today. But I also mention the law on the obligation of transparency, of Minister Dekker. It obliges foundations and institutions to make transparent who donates money to those foundations. And I myself, together with the Minister of Foreign Affairs, am working on the bill on undesirable foreign financing, precisely because there is undesirable influence bought from abroad, or can be bought which we have problems with in the Netherlands. The developments at the Cornelius Haga Lyceum in Amsterdam show that problematic behaviour often involves a complex layering of reality. So things aren't always criminal. But anti-democratic, anti-integrative and untolerant behavior is socially undesirable. Mr Van Meenen asked in his contribution to the role of this school in the local approach of Amsterdam. From the municipality I understand that the school does not play an active role in that local approach of Amsterdam. However, there are contacts with the school from other parts of the municipality, as well as from the police. But in the local approach, there's no role for this school. However complicated it may be, the government has a responsibility to protect its citizens. The task force, together with these municipalities, is working on an overview of all possible interventions within each track of what is then called \"the three-track approach.\" We also call it the escalation ladder. We'll start with the conversation. If that doesn't work, we'll scale up, escalate, see if we can move on. These are both measures that can be taken from the municipality and measures that are more at national level, i.e. those of the state. This escalation ladder will also include the measures emerging from the investigations currently under way by the Minister of the Interior. It is primarily about possibilities for intervention and, secondly, about existing interventions in other areas. Think of the outlaw motorcycle gangs. I believe that Mrs Kuik has an initiative law on this issue. Or take the Wet Bibob, who just came by to see colleague Slob. Perhaps these can be applicable to the present forms of problematic behavior. Again, it's wider than just this school. It's really about several areas. Mr Heerema of the VVD asked about the integration of children. Most of the policy in my field focuses on the parents. The following applies specifically to the children. There is a citizenship mission, and Mr Slob has just spoken about it, which requires schools to pay attention to active citizenship, democratic values and social inclusion. The new legislative proposal further extends and strengthens this obligation. In practice, we notice that parents with a migration background sometimes need extra support to educate their children in such a way that they feel at home in and connected to the Netherlands. Then we started pilots in five municipalities with the title Weathering, just to see what we can come up with to help parents. Parents play an important role in preventing anti-integrative and anti-democratic behaviour. They're running now. A report on this issue was published at the end of 2018. At the moment, we are looking at what we can do more broadly and how we can follow up where we can also help it roll out a bit wider and other municipalities on this important issue of preventing defenseless children from falling prey, so to speak, to anti-democratic and anti-integrative behaviour. What I also think is important to say is that there is a need from the community for well Islamic-oriented education. The fact that high quality secondary education with an Islamic basis is possible shows the developments at the Avicenna College in Rotterdam, for example. Mr Van Meenen spoke about this and also Mr Heerema. This is education aimed at integration, citizenship and participation in Dutch society, but also with space for one's own religious identity as a starting point. There too we see that in practice it is a daily search. That's why Avicenna College is an example. You see that struggle, and it's still a focus for all of us. I would like to emphasise that the communities involved often suffer most from this problematic behaviour. That is what Mr Heerema said in his speech. The behaviour of some rotten apples affects the whole community, as they are confronted with messages that make it more difficult for them to participate fully in society. Problematic behaviour also has a negative impact on the Islamic community as a whole. Wrongly, an entire community is addressed on and also identified with the behaviour of a few complex figures, let me put it this way: those who very consciously place themselves outside society with their views and really do not want to be part of society. That is why, as a government, we also see the Islamic communities as important partners for the local government in particular, but also for the government in the fight against problematic behavior. We're good at talking to each other to strengthen that position. Islamic education can count on active protection of the municipal and also the national authorities. Mr. Chairman. That's it. Those were the questions I was asked. Thank you."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-03-26-tweedekamer-17.u118", "speech text": "Thank you, Mr President. Today we are discussing Mr Snels' own-initiative proposal and six other Members of Parliament. First of all, I would like to congratulate the authors on this bill. The reason for this proposal is the absurd salary increase that ING director Ralph Hamers wanted to give himself in spring 2018. According to him and according to Jeroen van der Veer, EUR 2 million from ING's supervisory board was not enough. No, it had to be and it was going to be 3 million euros. Mr. Hamers played Champions League and was paid out according to the standards of the Jupiter League. So 50% had to be added at a time when the purchasing power of the average Dutchman only increased by about half a percent per year. ING: intensive cross-standard gripping. The top of the ING bank became known as the hard-hitting Dutch. Under great political and social pressure, the salary proposal was later withdrawn. Now the same Mr. Hammers from the same ING bank comes up with the bizarre statement that the bonus policy in the Netherlands is too strict and that therefore certain financial jobs do not come to the Netherlands after the Brexit. This gentleman doesn't have a plate for his head, but half the Biesbosch. The banking sector proves to be very hard learners over and over again. Therefore, supervision of banks needs to be strengthened. Mr. Chairman. It is clear that the DENK Group will therefore wholeheartedly support this proposal. Wrong financial incentives lead to wrong actions, wrong policies, wrong financial products, the spread of wrong risks and wrong debt positions. This ultimately undermines the stability and integrity of the entire financial system. Any proposal that restricts these perverse incentives can count on the warm support of the DENK Group. Large capital in the financial sector collapsed the world in 2008 into the worst economic crisis after the Second World War. This bill is necessary because this sector has proven itself to be a hard learner. Banks and the financial sector have been under discussion for years. DENK is critical of the functioning of the banks and the financial sector. Too often things have gone wrong in the past. Mr. Chairman. This has been going on for a long time. In the 1980s and 1990s there were already so-called junk bonds: worthless bonds that were sold with all kinds of sales tricks. Around the turn of the century there were the known accounting frauds at Enron, at Xerox, at WorldCom, at World Online, at Ahold, at Parmalat. Later we had the share lease affair with Legio Lease and Dexia Bank, in which people invested with borrowed money without knowing. Even later, we had the very extensive usury policy affair, in which banks and insurers sold financial products with very high hidden costs. Millions of them have been sold. Then there was the DSB affair, in which people with temporary decoy interest rates were tempted to take a lot of credit and buy-out policies, which eventually caused them to suffer from unaffordable debts. Research after research showed that advice from financial advisors only brought the consumer out of the rain. The advisors, including those of the banks, mainly advised products that paid themselves the most commission, putting the consumer's interest aside. It was \"self-interest first\" and \"the higher the profit, the better.\" In retrospect, it is inconceivable that these so-called bounty hunts could last until 2013, when the ban on the commissioning of a number of products finally came into force. Mr. Chairman. The 2008 credit crisis has already been referred to a few times today by profit maximization and perverse incentives in banks, wrongly provided mortgages and incorrect financial constructions. The financial sector crisis eventually led to a global economic recession of unprecedented magnitude at macro level. But at micro level, many personal dramas had preceded it, especially in people who were wrongly advised about financial products. Some lost their homes because of a mortgage that should never have been granted. Others lost their money because they had invested without knowing it in structured packages of these toxic mortgages. The crisis in the financial sector eventually shifted to the real sector, which ultimately affected billions of people. The central point between financial instability on the one hand and the general economic crisis on the other hand turned out to be the bankruptcy of the Lehman Brothers bank on 15 September 2008. Within a few weeks of that black Monday, all the economies of the world sank into a deep recession. For the irresponsible behavior of greedy bankers, countless people eventually had to pay the bill. In short, it is not surprising that many people no longer have confidence in the financial sector. The customer interest is still not central, as shown by TV programmes such as Radar and Kassa. Examples are the interest rate derivatives dossier, the lack of credit that SMEs still suffer from, and the fact that banks do not want to help their own customers with lower mortgage rates. The consumer must always ask for this and is systematically opposed. In 2009, a code of conduct was introduced with the core of \"the customer central'. That customer had to be at the heart of things at last. But this still doesn't seem to be between the ears of many bankers. The latest version of this Code of Conduct started on 1 January 2015. I would like to hear from the Minister whether and when there will be a third, improved version of the Banking Code. As far as the DENK Group is concerned, this should become a code of conduct which not only lingers in the boardroom, but also penetrates the workplace. I'd like a response from the Minister. Mr. Chairman. Mr Van der Linde of the VVD referred to the clawback. Why are banks still resisting this? It is a power of the Minister of Finance to recover part of the fixed remuneration if the State has to save a bank as a result of that bank's mismanagement. The banking lobby doesn't want this. This testifies once again to the hard learning of the sector. Mr. Chairman. Finally, the diversity of the banking landscape. Can the Minister examine the possibilities of transforming the Volksbank and ABN AMRO into sustainable public banks offering basic payment services? The WRR, the Scientific Council for Government Policy, also advised this in January. I'd like a response from the petitioners and the minister. Mr. Chairman. To conclude: as far as the DENK group is concerned, this is a fine bill, which helps to tackle the problems. I wish all six petitioners success with the defense here in the Chamber and hopefully later in the Upper Chamber. Thank you."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-03-28-tweedekamer-10.u19", "speech text": "Just so we're clear, I'm gonna stick with the defense motion. Furthermore, at the moment, I cannot come up with a plan, because the motion and the subsequent question are based on an assumption about situations that are likely to come. It is not at the moment a question of speculating on this. The cabinet cannot do that in such a letter. Mr. Chairman. Then I have an answer to Mr De Graaf's question as to whether Mr G\u00f6kmen T. was familiar with the services. I have already said that there is no way in which I can answer these questions. Again, at the end of next month, or at least before the Mayaces, but that begins, I believe, on King's Day 27 April, I will come to the Chamber with a letter. I have expressly said, and I repeat this to all parties, that I will really put everything together, in so far as the interests of criminal investigation permit."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-04-02-tweedekamer-26.u2", "speech text": "Mr. Chairman. A year ago, one of the Dutch largest companies, AkzoNobel, sold its Specialty Chemicals component to the private equity investment company Carlyle. He received a loan from the State Fund from Singapore. The reason for this sale was not the poor market conditions and neither did Akzo's operating results nor the Specialty Chemicals component. The sale was motivated by the desire to pay shareholders a short-term dividend of more than 5 billion in 2018 and 2019. So these are more than 5 billion that are not invested in the company and not in the Netherlands, but they usually disappear in foreign hands. The case has a background. AkzoNobel threatened to be taken over by PPG in its entirety in 2017. By blocking this hostile takeover, American and British shareholders, in particular, who missed their takeover premium, felt disadvantaged. They have actually been paid off with the vast majority of the proceeds from the sale of Specialty Chemicals, which is now called Nouryon. A well-functioning business has actually been sold to spawn American and British shareholders. Mr. Chairman. The Minister has written to this Chamber to attach to the harmonious Rhine model. Does he not agree with the SP that in this case we see much more the effects of the Anglo-Saxon shareholder model, where the desire for short-term profits can directly conflict with longer-term business interests? If so, how can we protect our companies from these effects? Carlyle's business model is to buy up companies or business lines and sell them again after a short period of time. It is obvious that they intend to do the same with Nouryon. Moreover, the company is saddled with most of the debt of the loan needed to buy the company. Carlyle needs a quick win. Nouryon's new top manager has already talked about an aggressive strategy. And in the meantime, the investments that are being made take place in America, where the company also wants to go public in the future. Meanwhile, the more than 2,500 Dutch employees are actually on the sidelines in this process. Although they have helped the company to build up, they cannot do much more than use their legal advisory rights in this type of business; an advice that is subsequently ignored. If this is the Rhineland model, then we must conclude that it is really nothing more than an optical illusion: the appearance of participation to ensure that reality seems less serious. Mr. Chairman. I would like to put two basic questions to the Minister. In the first place, is he prepared to come up with further proposals to strengthen the position of employees vis-\u00e0-vis shareholders, precisely in order to counter the negative effects of corporate takeovers or the rejection of business parts? Second. How are we going to prevent large Dutch companies from being so defenseless for foreign shareholders in the future, aimed at short-term profits, that they must also have the negative impact on the employment associated with them? How can we arm ourselves against this? Thank you, Mr. Chairman."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-04-03-tweedekamer-2.u173", "speech text": "No, he didn't get 16 years. In the end, he only got eleven years, and that means that he was already free after six, seven years. And I'm not just suggesting, I share the opinion of many Dutch people who have had enough that criminal attorneys do everything to hide the truth in a courtroom and exonerate horrible offenders, murderers and rapists. They go beyond what the law deems necessary. So nat\u00fa\u00farlijk needs every suspect good defense, but there are too many criminal attorneys who lie and cheat in court, who hide the truth, who don't tell the truth in court. I have spoken against this before and I think that many Dutch people with me are sick of all those criminal attorneys who do everything..."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-04-03-tweedekamer-5.u56", "speech text": "That is precisely the key question, because the Minister began by saying: I feel in my fibers that this must be done. Then the driver came up in him, who said: they may be incidents, it is still human work, and I have already taken these measures. It felt as if there was irritation, as if there was only defense, when we needed that sense of urgency with each other. At the end of this debate, we must have the confidence that every fibre feels that this is a structural problem, that this is not yesterday's problem, that this problem requires immediate solutions. If we continue the debate in a game of defense and do not feel that it is a mentality problem, a cultural problem, an urgency problem, then this debate is actually pointless. That's what I'm looking for."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-04-09-tweedekamer-30.u45", "speech text": "I get it. It's all going one step at a time. That is, of course, what we see in the end. We are fully committed to this. I see that steps are being taken, and that is what Mrs Diks sees when she walks around our workplace. Mr Kerstens cited a survey. It is, of course, painful and understandable that such a survey has been carried out, but you can only make improvements step by step. The staff and the good stuff must always go on together. That's the way we see it. So the judgment remains the same. The Secretary of State will say something about the ammunition side. The motion in part No. Mr Kerstens asked for a plan of action. I have already said that we find what is being found painful but also understandable. It's not new to us, just like it's not new to you. We've realized from the beginning that when it comes to trust in the Defense Department, we have to come a long way. That is not because we are necessarily responsible for it, but because we are faced with it in this case. We have also always said that we find this a difficult task and that what we are now investing as a cabinet is this 1.5 billion, but a good start to achieve a large-scale recovery in the end. We have put that down from the beginning, from day one. But with a plan to work on restoring trust, I don't think you're adding anything. I really want to discourage this motion. I think it's about doing things, showing things, talking to people. One of the things I've noticed in the defense department is that we already have a huge bureaucracy. Then, please, let us not write another plan of action, but just get to work and show what we stand for. So this is what I'm talking about. Then I hope that Mr Kerstens will help, that we will simply show each other that we are doing the right things and that we are working on that together. So I would certainly advise against this motion, because I do not want to put time in writing plans."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-04-09-tweedekamer-30.u66", "speech text": "So that's what I'm gonna try to do. The motion has already been dissuaded by the Minister. You received a D letter from me last year on investment in ammunition supplies. I would also like to make the point that it has also been established by the Chamber that it is necessary, precisely for the employment and safety of our military personnel, that they can work and practice with the right equipment and the right equipment. The Minister has already given an example of this. What we are doing now is only for the main task number 2, the international legal order. That's what ammunition supplies are for. I am working not only for main task 2, but also for main task 1 to make clear what that means for ammunition stocks, both in terms of deployment and in terms of practice, but also in terms of clothing and also in terms of what is called 'operational infrastructure' with a very nice word. Then you're talking about the tents, the heaters and whatever you need, regardless of whether you're operating in the highest spectrum of violence, for your defense commitment, when it comes to your first main task. As the Minister also pointed out, it's good to realize that it's not or-or. It's and-and, because our military also want good combat boots, good combat suits, a good tent and plenty of ammunition. Those are all kinds of things that go with it. I would like to move on to Mr Kerstens' motion on item No. 117 on the RVU levy. I think we're in agreement on that point. It is not for nothing that I have also indicated, in connection with the CDA's parliamentary questions, that I object to the RVU tax imposed. I don't have an answer to that yet. That is why I would ask Mr Kerstens to hold his motion, because I would first like to know what will come out of it. I would like to stress that this debate was held under the previous cabinet, Rutte II, with the then Minister of Social Affairs, the then Secretary of State for Finance and the then Minister of Defence. Social Affairs emphasized that the aim of the tax imposed on Defence was an incentive which one would like to lay down with employers, as Social Affairs had also proposed. I myself think you should look at that differently, because we have a law from 1966, which was much earlier than the RVU tax. That is why I have objected. That is why I would like to await the ruling, so I would really ask Mr Kerstens to hold the motion."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-04-10-tweedekamer-4.u183", "speech text": "This interruption is part of a recognizable pattern, so that is in that sense a reassurance. First of all, an image is being created that Mrs Leijten herself outlined. She says that this is the government's position and then she asks me not to do so. Well, what Mrs Leijten just outlined was not the government's position. She sketched a lot of topics. No veto on defense. This has never been the case. No veto on foreign policy. The only thing that has been raised is the veto on human rights sanctions, for example, which the Chamber wants and which can now be stopped by one of the 28 Member States, perhaps also the country where an important port has just been financed by a country that could be targeted by human rights sanctions. In such a situation, it can really be in the Dutch interest to say: human rights sanctions are not unanimous. That's the only thing that's in store. This is just for the sake of relativization. Furthermore, the Dutch government's priorities are clear. I would appreciate it if other governments would put that on the table as clearly as possible."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-04-16-eerstekamer-7.u16", "speech text": "That's actually what our country always says. The Minister will undoubtedly put it more effectively and better than I am now improvising. If there is criticism, for example, of the fact that we are not achieving the 2% standard for defence, then we are not always wrong to say: that is true; in fact, we should achieve that; that is what my group also thinks, but do not forget all our other financial efforts to promote international stability. We are talking about issues ranging from the promotion of the rule of law, from the rule of law to classical development cooperation, as a whole package of stability-enhancing measures. But that includes defense. If you look at the situation in the world at the moment, there is more reason to pay extra attention to defence than there was at the time."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-04-16-eerstekamer-7.u18", "speech text": "I do not think you can expect the EU as a whole, of 27 Member States, to have a common view of the importance of those 27 Member States. That's why in defense you usually see a coalition of \"the able and the willing\" of those who are able and willing to act when it comes to actual action. But it's exactly as Mrs. Strik says it is. You're gonna have to see what you can develop together. And that's what's gonna happen. The Netherlands cooperates with Germany. The Netherlands cooperates with Belgium. We're pooling equipment. We're working with Britain. In my opinion, when it comes to actual implementation, it is better to allow it to grow from below rather than from above. So that's also a bit of a growth process you're going through. I am sure that will not end up with a European army of 27 Member States. But that does lead to more power, including in the defence field, of a number of countries that want to defend their own interests and values."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-04-16-eerstekamer-7.u90", "speech text": "I'm going to serve Mr. Van Apeldoorn on his beck and call later. After all, it is another nuanced argument. Mr. Chairman. I was at the first real concrete experience of cutting off the branch, namely the Brexit. The unbundling of the exit agreement shows, of course, that what is called 'ceteris paribus' in the economy, namely that all other factors remain the same, can never apply after a Brexit. The political leaders in the UK did not have a solution for this either. That turned out to be the day after the referendum. Nigel Farage immediately resigned as leader of UKIP. Gradually, it turns out that the promise actually didn't have any substance. This is tragic for those who voted in good faith. In fact, it's a time machine without a real calendar or plan: back to somewhere, back to when it was better. But the big question is, of course, when was that? Everything has gradually changed since the Treaty of Rome. In the metaphor, the tree has been given many branches. We have had all these great treaties, the Treaties of Maastricht, Nice and Lisbon, and then all the other less large ones. The essence of my point is that the Brexit is of a symbolic order. No cost-benefit analysis has been made. The value of sovereignty has only been mentioned and pursued, but the value for the citizens, that what that sovereignty is going to earn in real terms in their lives, has never been priced at all. You could say \"that might not be priced, because that's a feeling\" but then you should also be honest and say: it's going to cost you a lot of money, but well, then you'll be back in your own trusted environment. That is why \"take back control\" has of course been found so handsome, because it encourages the feeling of losing grip and ignores the characteristic that cross-border action over the national scale is needed to be effective. This is even more true for the Netherlands than for the UK. Let those who say that in a Brexit but also in a nexit just say honestly: we are going to lose prosperity, we are less effective, the citizen is going to go backwards, but we have our way; the pain is through self- chastisement, but it is less bad, because we have done it ourselves. That is not the line we want to choose. That's why a Brexit is also a destructive concept. Unfortunately, we can now see that unfolding. What's the other approach now? Mr Van Apeldoorn and Mr Kuiper also asked for this. That is the further development, construction and improvement of the European Union. There are many persistent differences in prosperity, between Member States, between regions, in neighbourhoods, in cities, between developed countries with a developed welfare state and Member States that do not yet have a minimum wage or even have no assistance. The European Union is a community of values which is progressing shockfully, sometimes backwards, and which is not moving forward unanimously. You'd love to, but you can see that it's also deteriorating in some areas. We have already discussed the complaints about Poland and Hungary, about Article 7. But at crucial moments, which could have turned out to be quite different, the EU, and within the euro area, proved more shock-resistant than expected. I would remind you of the role of the support funds. We have passed them all here in the legislation: Ireland, Malta, Cyprus, Portugal, Spain. They are now back in a phase of economic growth. We now have 3.8% unemployment in this country. Economic growth is taking place in all the countries of Europe. We would have cut the Netherlands down, but it didn't happen. The shock-resistant capacity of the euro area was much greater than we thought. But there are shortcomings. We do not need to be convinced of that. A number of instruments needed to mitigate macroeconomic shocks and stimulate investment have not been included in the instruments when introducing the single currency. That was too early then, but I'd say it's time to do so now. Before the forthcoming European elections, my colleagues in the European Parliament have many radical wishes in many areas, including the circular economy, the energy transition, consumer protection and the social dimension. I come to the point Mr Van Apeldoorn mentioned. There is also an important moment of choice and, in my opinion, a dilemma for him as well. The social pillar can only take shape if facilities are put in place to promote social security in other Member States that are lagging behind. So it is not about breaking our system down to a lower level, but about helping to build other systems. For example, freedom in connectedness should look from the social-liberal point of view: forward rather than stagnation. Then the differences in prosperity will not disappear as snow before the sun, but together we can do more than separate. This was also discovered by the States of Holland and Friesland in this room, where we are now allowed to meet. Mr. Chairman. It concerns the D66 Group in debates that we look ourselves in the eye and say: it is our responsibility to do better in those international fora, to form the right coalitions, to be inventive, and to run a step faster or to be smarter. The outcome is the result of giving and taking. That was just the subject of Mr Schaap. There is now a creeping erosion of self-confidence of middle parties in our country and in other countries in Europe, sometimes with the open accommodation that the EU is the cause of all shortcomings. But that's not gonna make us any better. The symbolism of the anti-EU sentiments discussed reflects a choice not to dare to engage in dialogue with the critics of Europe, but we must have that dialogue. \"You cannot live in chatter or symbolism,\" said a former politician of the Labour Party. The defense file just came by. That's actually exemplary. Of course, very far-reaching decisions have already been taken on joint defence, NATO and the EU. We were just talking about sovereignty again, but we are already working with the Belgians and with the Germans. We have integrated brigades. The Dutch army can no longer act without other European countries. We could, in my mind, save about 30 billion dollars in European defence procurement if we worked together. We have now reached legally binding agreements on a European security and defence policy, also on the basis of the Treaty of Lisbon."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-04-16-tweedekamer-28.u143", "speech text": "For the cultural aspects, I can imagine that the Minister will consult NOOM, the Network of Organisations of Older Migrants. Finally, a few words about the right of access. Much has passed by on this, in the run-up to this debate and in the debate itself, in the defense of the Minister for his bill, to which a number of colleagues have tabled amendments and which I and other colleagues have asked critical questions about. In any case, the Labour Party is going to look again at the amendments tabled by colleagues before we vote, because, as I said in my speech, there is no 'just a little criticism' of that aspect of the legislative proposal. The minister finds many parties opposite, not only in the Lower House, but also in the field, where there is a broad front, a broad coalition of patient and client organisations and industry organisations of aid workers."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-04-17-tweedekamer-13.u93", "speech text": "But that's not what I'm saying. I'm not saying it's not a very big problem. It's a big problem, though. I'm just trying to show that I don't think it's illogical that the healthcare sector is the biggest detector of all sectors in the Netherlands. In fact, if the healthcare sector were not the biggest detector, I would be worried, because that would indicate a lack of alertness. It is a sector with 1.3 million people, much larger than any sector. One in seven people with work works in care. In that care, everyone deals with confidential data every day. So if not a large part of the AP reports were to come out of the care, then we really should be worried. Is this a major task for the care sector? Yes, of course the care sector has a huge task, because there are so many people with so much confidential data. And so the healthcare sector has a very big mission. That's a big assignment we have to live up to. I'll outline what steps we can take later. But I didn't want to make it any smaller than reality and what's actually going on. What I am saying is that the scale of the numbers is not so much a lack of care, but rather a sufficient level of alertness. I'm happy about that on my own. I'm not ruling out any more next year. In fact, maybe we should all hope that next year the number of reports from healthcare is more. That would indicate a growing alertness and with that alertness it should begin. We can't do anything. We can make rules until we're on our own and we can set up systems, set up firefighters' functions, but it really starts with common sense. Mrs Kuik said that quite rightly. Mr Peters said it too. Common sense. And also: what you do not want to happen to you... when it comes to sharing data. That's actually the most simple rule in life at all, but especially when it comes to data sharing. What would you think if it were your family, if it were your child? Would you like to see it all out in the open? No, of course not. And so: common sense and treat another in terms of information as you would like to be treated yourself. That's actually the first line of defense or defense wall versus data leaks."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-04-17-tweedekamer-2.u22", "speech text": "I'm obviously grateful for that, but I want to make a point because this is always making me worse. If the PVV has been calling for something for years, it hasn't been supported for 13 years, but a few years later the parties suddenly come up with it themselves. Then we'll be tens of thousands of battered animals later. Why? Why always wait to come up with it yourself? Political gain, party politics over the back of defenseless creatures, who are far more sensitive than you, Mr Moorlag, I say through the chairman."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-04-24-tweedekamer-3.u134", "speech text": "Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to begin by congratulating the initiators, including the defense on this day. It's a good story, so it won't surprise you that we wholeheartedly support the bill. It is ultimately about restoring confidence, as has been said several times. Without trust, there is no financial sector. When you look at the financial sector and the lessons learned, you see that people are very hard learners and always look for loopholes in the law. It must therefore be the policy that sets the limits of what can and cannot be done for a sound financial sector. Then we actually put the ball on the spot for the Minister today. We have taken the step today to give him a position that is much firmer. The goal's empty, it's only 10 feet, and he's really gonna shoot it high. Maybe we won't get out today, but how is the Minister going to hit that ball really hard? He says: I am also going to make a number of proposals and I am also prepared to intervene in part if necessary. We are very curious about that, because that must be very firm. Because we now know from this financial sector that if we are not able to take firm action as a political one, it will be the right conversation. Then it remains that dialogue, the cup of coffee and the moment they drive away in their big car, they think: nice, we go back to our own course and maintain our own work and our own culture. So, Minister, kick him in the ass! If not today, do it as soon as possible! Thank you."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-05-16-tweedekamer-4.u85", "speech text": "Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Today we are talking, and much has already been said, about the revaluation of certain forms of crime. The cabinet introduces two new crimes, namely revenge porn and obstruction of aid workers. Vengeance porn takes up to one year in prison and perpetrators who hinder aid workers can count on up to three months in prison. In addition, the penalty ceilings for a number of offences go up a bit. That goes for home invasion. Theft in a home is now subject to a maximum of six years in prison, regardless of the time at which this crime is committed. Trade and possession of automatic firearms will be subject to a maximum of eight years in prison. In addition, there is an increase in criminal liability for child abuse. Child abuse is terrible and, by definition, has very vulnerable victims. It is therefore a good thing that the Cabinet wishes to extend the limitation period for child abuse and to add systematic abuse as a separate grounds for increased criminality, and that the grounds for increased criminality for child abuse are extended to other persons, such as people working in schools, boarding schools and health care institutions, where abuse is too common. The PVV always welcomes the increase in penalties, especially in the case of offences that have a major impact on the victim and society. However, the penalties now being announced are not substantial. For I ask the Minister: if someone robs a defenseless woman in her own home, is six years of jail time a terrifying punishment? Is that really high enough? If an aid worker is harassed and hindered on old and new occasions, so that the aid workers cannot provide adequate help and have to do their work at risk for their own well-being, is three months really a great punishment? This minister says that people who commit violence against aid workers and agents should not get away with community service. We agree. But a few days in prison, apparently, the Minister thinks it's terrifying enough? I wonder how aid workers and agents who are constantly being attacked with old and new people think about this themselves. Why does the Minister not propose, for example, a minimum of five years in prison for this kind of horrible crime? And is the Minister prepared to ask the aid workers themselves what they think is an appropriate punishment, and to inform the Chamber about it? So the increases proposed by the Minister are not really very much. But we have another major problem in the Netherlands, and that problem is so great that all these increases will prove to be almost irrelevant. The problem is and is: the magistrate in the Netherlands, the judges and the members of the Public Prosecutor's Office. Namely: the Public Prosecutor's Office often requires too low penalties and judges often impose far too low penalties. The ordinary citizen has been calling this out for years, but nobody in the Chamber wants to do anything about it except the PVV. The magistrate is given by everyone here in the Chamber and by the Cabinet but is given the space to ignore the will of the people, high, just punishments instead of low, weak punishments. As mentioned above, any increase in penalties is welcomed by the PVV, but the penalties in the Netherlands are and remain far too low. Take the only three years of jail time a tbser's been given. He was already in the tbs, then he raped an employee there, and he only got three years in prison for this rape. For a rape! Or take the terror father who has systematically abused ten of his children for years and years and locked his children in the attic and in a shipping container. He was only sent to prison for two years. Or the asylum seeker who has only been sentenced to 20 months for a gruesome rape, who is later qualified as 'other', so that no one knows that asylum seekers commit such terrible crimes. According to the Minister, this bill has a terrifying function. The maximum penalties proposed by the Minister for the crimes he has chosen are only a tiny piece of cloth on a bleeding wound. For example, I have examples of too low penalties up to and including jut-jut, but let me mention one more example: that was extended today in De Telegraaf. Michel B. was convicted in 2008 for the multiple rape of a child. Raping a child! But within one year this Michel B. will be outside again. He shouldn't have been in jail for one year, as far as I'm concerned, he should have been in jail for at least 20 or 30 years, or even life for me, because a child has been raped. The judges, they should've gotten TBs, because they're crazy enough to give such a horrible criminal just one year in jail. Then a question to the Minister. Why does the Minister think that the increase in the penalty ceilings in the law will actually have an effect? For example, in 2012, the maximum penalty for trafficking in human beings was increased from eight to 12 years, but the number of convictions for trafficking in human beings has only fallen. Judges didn't go to prison any harder. For example, in 2016, the average penalty for trafficking in human beings was only one and a half years. The only way for judges to actually impose higher penalties is by introducing minimum penalties. At present, judges have an uncontrolled freedom in the area of punishment. Nevertheless, despite everything, this CDA minister has done a lot of work on one increase. That was the doubling of the penalty rate in Article 137d. But that's because his party, the CDA, saw in this doubling the opportunity to call a political opponent. A political reckoning. CDA-poldermafia practices. The leader of my party, the PVV, has been unjustly haunted by the Dutch magistrate on the basis of this article for six years now. And that, as a child understands, the competition is of course convenient. The penalty rate for this article should not now be doubled. This article needs to be amended first. This article unnecessarily restricts freedom of expression; we have just discussed it. Of course, you should not encourage violence, but the freedom of expression in the Netherlands should be extended and not restricted. The next question is to the Minister. Why didn't the Minister choose to increase and, for example, double the penalty for rape, manslaughter, aggravated assault or robbery? These seem to me to be serious crimes, even those that are now being punished too low. Why doesn't the minister do anything about the low penalties for the most serious crimes? Thank you."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-05-21-eerstekamer-12.u128", "speech text": "Well, I didn't hear them say that. And I also think that some of the initiators here will appeal to the government about what will be in that plan. They won't turn to the tables. I can count on that, can't I? I'm hearing some corroborating noises around me. That's what I thought! I see we agree on a lot of things in this country. Then we'll get to those targets. Because is it the case that if you want to regulate parliamentary order and Parliament's involvement, then there must be goals in it? Well, they're in there quite often. Laws on air quality and the environment often have standards, so they are often in them. But in this case there is another reason, because we already know these goals. They're old acquaintances. If we say there must be a 95% reduction by 2050, it's already been through here with you. The ratification law has also been passed by you. We've already decided that. That's an old acquaintance. That's nothing new. This objective of fully CO-neutral electricity production simply follows from the scenarios. Because if you want to reach the first, you're stuck with the second. Yeah, there are also scenarios that say you have to have negative emissions with your power supply. That may be true, but positive emissions from electricity are not part of the scenarios, so that just follows. And also about the third goal, the 49%, I don't have to be very secretive: that's what I'm getting at with............................................................................................................................................................................................................................................... We've drawn the line between now and 2050, and then you come up with something for 2030. And that too, live the ruler! It follows from what has already been decided here. I will have to live with that, because we know that laws are passed by parliamentarians and not by members of the government. Mr Schalk has also made the analogy with NATO and pointed out that the 2% NATO target is very much cheaper than the climate target, but I will get to that in a moment. He says: well, that would be something; if we do it this way with goals, I might want to have a 2% target in the law. But, yes, that is the difference between a 2% target in the field of defence and climate policy. Mr Schalk can easily draw from a single document, the annual defence budget, exactly whether the 2% is achieved or not. He does not need any other integral document or overarching law to do so. That's a little different with climate. The climate goal comes from the addition of, but also the interaction between, a variety of different policy areas and various departments. That overarching, common goal requires some coordination. This would be beneficial if we were to write down an objective somewhere other than in a single budget. That's what we did here; that's what the initiators did here. That is quite logical, and the Council of State agrees with this in its opinions. It says that a goal in this law, a goal for climate policy, is useful. I believe they use the word \"useful.\" So there's a certain difference with the defense budget. Now we have goals, and if you don't make them, what happens? Mr Ten Hoeve said, very nuanced, for which I thank him, that it may be attractive that we do not bring about Urgenda-like situations here. At the same time, however, it is a question of whether, in his words, that should not be regulated a little tighter. That's actually the question. But then back to the purpose of this law. The purpose of this law is to involve Parliament in policy-making, not to place the judge in a political chair. Given that objective, it is logical that we commit ourselves without bringing in the judicial system immediately. In my view, that should be the answer. There is also a lot of question about how to decide on the Climate Act if you do not know the costs. I will come back to the size of the costs later. It's a question that's been asked, but right now it's the main issue. I must remind you that the Paris targets have already been ratified here. The joke of this climate law is that, in intensive treatment, within a framework and with a proper cycle, we can talk about what that policy should be, what it may cost and what the impact of that policy is. That is what this proposal is for, precisely in order to be able to have that conversation. So anyone who is concerned about costs should be us, but I'm going to have to come back to that later to embrace the fact that this climate law is forcing us to talk to each other over and over again. The big cost up to 2050 doesn't exist. There are estimates, but I will come back to that in a moment. Another point that has been raised a great deal is the so-called approval of the plan. But that is, of course, essentially about the role of Parliament. That too is important, precisely because that is the bruise it started with. That's why we're doing this. That is the central point, and that may be asked. So that's what this law is about. Whether it was Mr Pijlman or Mr Binnema, I can no longer trump them, because they have explained it very clearly. In that cycle there are government plans, as in so many other areas. The Millions note is a plan, but also structural visions, the Regional Planning Act, the MIRT, the NOVI and all legislation in the field of nitrogen and air quality. There is a plan and then we have the 200-year tradition of discussing it with each other. There is a tradition that the government takes motions seriously, also because otherwise it could be sent away ultimate. That's how you talk about a plan and then legislation comes along. There is only one person who can say yes or no to this legislation, and those are the people present here. That's a big difference between a bill and a plan. That is the case in all these areas, and we have always done so. If every policy plan were to follow the route of a bill, you would in fact create a very busy task for this Chamber, because then it becomes co-ruled. That was never really the intention, and none of the speakers found the intention. The Council of State's opinion on the handling of this plan has been explicitly followed, so it is as the Council of State suggests."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-06-05-tweedekamer-13.u2", "speech text": "Mr President, thank you. Whose public information is provided by planning agencies? As far as I am concerned, that is the question that is at the heart of today's debate. Whose information is it? Good journalistic research by Nieuwsuur has shown that the Prime Minister has acted as a driving force when it had to be published. The Prime Minister has indicated at what time the calculations of the Planning Bureau for the Environment could best be shared with the Netherlands and with the Chamber. I think that's problematic. I would like to stress that I do not want to have this debate to indicate that the Prime Minister has made mistakes or to accuse him. I would like to use this debate to clarify how we are going to work together in the coming period. The climate file is a sensitive file. I think there will be a number of speakers tonight who say: you see, the cabinet is behind everything; you see, they are trying to fool the people. I think that's a problem. If we want to build support for climate action, there should in no way be the idea that information is being withheld. The only way to do that is to ensure that plans are immediately shared with the Chamber. I would therefore like the Prime Minister to comment on the following. The memo of EZK of 24 August states that it will look at whether the transfer is made public before or after Prinsjesdag and that it will depend on the content of this transfer. In the memo of August 31, AZ says that publication is undesirable. And that while the Ministry of Economic Affairs and other advisers finally state that it is important to proceed to publication before Princess Day to prevent leaks, in order to avoid thinking that things are being withheld, which I also warned you about. For me, the desired outcome of this debate is that we agree that the information that is yet to come is shared directly with the Chamber, even if there is no cabinet juice. I didn't think the Prime Minister's defense was one of his best moments, I'll say. It is often the case that reports are presented that are not yet ready for cabinet juice. I call the Urgenda targets. Are they gonna be made or not? We've been waiting 20 weeks for a further appreciation of that. I am looking at the figures presented in March of this year, which is already ten weeks ago on the climate agreement. Again, we are still waiting for a cabinet response. So it's possible. I really want the Prime Minister's promise that in future he will also send all the credit transfers that come to the Chamber as soon as they are available. Because, of course, there are quite a few pots on the fire, as the Prime Minister himself calls it. I would really like to know which calculations are already complete and can therefore be shared with the Chamber. Mr. Chairman. Finally, I would like to ask whether the Prime Minister would like to comment on the debate I had with him during the General Political Reviews. I asked him about the CO tax and how it could contribute to achieving the climate targets. We have talked about how hard the agreements in the climate agreement are. That is what he literally said in the debate: I cannot say anything about it now, we are still looking at it, we have to wait for the PBL bill. But it was ready. It would have been right to say: I haven't been able to deal with that, I haven't been able to respond yet, I don't know yet. It was said to us here: it is not ready yet. That'll put the Chamber on the line. Because the Prime Minister knows exactly what the Chamber would have said. The moment he said \"it's there,\" we'd have asked for it. He could not have refused and then it should have come to the Chamber. Mr President, I come to a conclusion. I hope that today the Prime Minister will make a commitment that all the information coming from the planning agencies will be shared directly with the Chamber."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-06-05-tweedekamer-13.u48", "speech text": "I kind of like it. The VVD has a new line of defense. If there's criticism, the senders of that criticism are stupid or weird or confused. Jesse Clover is stupid. Mrs. Marijnissen is stupid. I'm stupid. Mr. Wilders is stupid. News hour, which has questions, is, of course, stupid, like all those journalists at Rutte's press conference. They're all very stupid, because everyone knew what was going on from July 10th. Then the climate pope told you that at the end of September you will receive the appreciation. That's kind of the line of defense as I understood it. So that should end with us apologizing for harassing the VVD and the Prime Minister with questions about this really nasty accusation that this is weird. In that light, I wonder if you think Mr Ed Nijpels is stupid too. He sent a steamy email late on 5 September in the evening in which he said: \"There was agreement on 13 September up to the highest level. That was not just a matter of reason, but on the basis of careful consideration. That was also agreed with the Planning Agency.\" He was the client, wasn't he? \"AZ then started to object to political arguments, namely: it has to be lifted over the APB.\" 'Political arguments' have been cleared up, by the way. Further on, he says: \"I am not going to ask the PBL to postpone the press conference on the basis of the above points. It stands for AZ, or even better the mp.\"You taste the bitterness of the former leader of that party, who sees how democratic principles are squandered \"free to contact the PBL yourself.\" I don't mind if you share this note with AZ. Put it in the archives.\" How stupid do you think Ed Nijpels is, if we're all so stupid here that we're asking questions about this? He really didn't understand anything."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-06-05-tweedekamer-13.u52", "speech text": "Yes, you've said that a few times. Then the Prime Minister is free to interpret an appointment in a way that the client of an independent agency who has not experienced and about which he sends furious e-mails? That's the VVD's defense line? That's what we have to do, and the rest isn't stupid, but curious?"}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-06-05-tweedekamer-13.u58", "speech text": "This is something interesting. Now the line of defense is changing. Just now it was a very stupid, no, curious question from all of us. Ed Nijpels was a super-oil dumb climate pope."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-06-05-tweedekamer-13.u60", "speech text": "I just said in my input: I think the cover-up is worse than the offense. I find it insane that if you are caught by Nieuwsuur, you say the Prime Minister's intervention for a debate: it is not a good time for me. I understand that. It's certainly not the first time or the last time that happens, but he gets caught and then there's a story like that. A story that the country will become completely unmanageable if we'd provided those figures. Bullshit! You have read the report and it says: these measures are too vague to be passed on and yes, CO-tax would be a good idea. It didn't come out because then the debate wouldn't be possible without cabinet juice, but it didn't come out because it was bad for the cabinet because there just wasn't anything there yet. That's what's going on. I'm fine with the line of defense being: yes, it wasn't that neat, but you've done that yourself while you were sitting there. That's a different line of defense than \"the whole opposition is crazy.\""}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-06-05-tweedekamer-13.u231", "speech text": "About that PBL report, we're getting those things, aren't we? We do business with planning agencies, too. There is no hearing and hearing on the results of a model. During the transits, questions will be asked to you. That's what I was told. Then they come back to you about six times with questions like, \"What does this mean?', \"What does that mean?\" And \"how should we interpret it?\" But once these models are turned, there's an outcome. The Prime Minister hangs his entire defense here on the fact that it is super-super important to always have a PBL report accompanied by a cabinet response. And at the end of September, the PBL will present a report without a cabinet response. It is therefore an opportunity argument that the Prime Minister is using, because if it had been so important, you would have caused it to be postponed for a week or the cabinet response to be made faster. You didn't."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-06-06-tweedekamer-12.u12", "speech text": "Mr. Chairman. The Jan van der Hejonstraat (Jan van der Hejonstraat) was spooked by a gas explosion a few kilometers from here on 27 January. Three homes were completely blown out of the street. There were no deaths, but there were ten wounded. The cause was a 12 centimeter crack in the cast iron gas pipeline. Here, too, it is a question of maintenance. We read in the newspaper this morning that we still have 3,830 kilometers of this kind of dangerous gas lines. Here too the story is: the execution of the replacement assignment is lagging behind what is needed. What's the Cabinet gonna do about this? The same applies to ICT. The General Court and Mr Snels have already spoken wisely about this. It is painful that even our highly qualified General Court cannot get a grip on what the government spends on maintaining ICT. Lack of a standardised accounting method seems to be the basis for this. Can the Minister now explain clearly why, according to the cabinet, one generic framework for governance, risk and compliance would not be a solution? And what about the exploration towards other ways to ensure that the responsibility for the maintenance of ICT systems is standardised? This is referred to in the cabinet response. Are we going to read in the next state that concrete agreements have been made about this? Is it conceivable that non-crucial ICT projects will temporarily go into the refrigerator until the maintenance of existing systems is in order? Is it possible to extend the powers of BIT as an ICT watchdog to research issues of ICT projects, I ask the Minister of the Interior. In that case, too, the call can be made in good time. Mr. Chairman. Finally, people. 'Cause it's about people. Today, I would like to focus on staff: the tension between enough money and too few people. Mr Nijboer mentioned this. The General Court notes that where this cabinet decided to invest, it often fails to actually spend the extra money. Where it was decided not to spend any extra money, the services of the Empire sometimes deteriorated. The Court of Auditors calls on the cabinet to pursue strategic personnel policy, and the cabinet hardly goes into that. With the police and the Defense Department, the outflow is even greater than the influx of new people, despite all the extra money. Mr Nijboer also mentioned this. When you realize the large numbers involved in the care, education and tax administration, care is in place for those in need who deserve good care, for children who deserve good education and for citizens and businesses who deserve well-controlled tax attacks. With Mr Nijboer I am curious about the reaction of the rulers to this. How do they tackle this gauntlet of the General Court? Mr. Chairman. On D-day, I want to end up with DOD. The readiness of the defence equipment has still not been restored, even though billions more have been added. The Court warns against a vicious circle. There are too few maintenance staff and there are too few engineers and buyers, so the recovery cannot be achieved. At the same time, the poor state in which our defense is providing a drain of personnel. See here the vicious circle the Court of Auditors warns against. How is the cabinet going to break this circle? Of course, it doesn't help if Defence doesn't even manage to reach an acceptable collective agreement with the unions. It is irresponsible for this situation in the defence sector to continue to be so."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-06-06-tweedekamer-12.u46", "speech text": "Thank you, Mr President. I didn't have a maiden speech two years ago because I had it long ago. But I do have a farewell speech today. Here I am again. Thank you for your lovely words. Mr. Chairman. The books for 2018 are closed. The Dutch government is including the tax claim there we're going again about 400 billion on pension assets probably the richest government in the euro area. I would, of course, like to congratulate the Minister on this result, but I also congratulate others, namely the citizens and businesses in our country. Together they raised the surplus of nearly 12 billion. Since 2012, collective burdens have increased by 3 percentage points, equivalent to EUR 24 billion higher taxes. The surplus should therefore not be surprised. It would be amazing if it hadn't been there. The other side of the coin of higher burdens and rising surpluses is, of course, the decline in purchasing power for years. In 2017 it was already very disappointing, in 2018 the weather was very disappointing and again this year we see the same pattern happening. Even the Central Planning Office didn't get past this. It re-examines the purchasing power estimate. Yeah, well, that doesn't mean anything. \"That's just disappointing,\" said Daniel van Vuuren, head of public finances of the Central Planning Bureau recently against De Telegraaf. \"Inflation seems to be higher before 2019 than we previously thought. We're going to look at that again in the next estimate.\" A few months ago, our critical questions about purchasing power figures for this year were answered in a casual manner, but now they are going to look at them again. Now that the cabinet is working on the AOW-age, the Central Planning Office comes to the aid of the established order with spontaneous sustainability billions. This makes the Central Planning Bureau vulnerable: sustainability at the command of ongoing negotiations. It looks like the Scientific Research and Documentation Centre (WODC): science on demand. I think there's more financial space in the longer term, but you can't pull it out when it suits you. 50PLUS is also always calculating and is entitled to the latest information. The reduction in the AOW age will be much more financially viable in the longer term with a windfall of 4 billion. Of course, we want to know that from 50PLUS immediately. Raising the AOW age was a political choice. Lowering the AOW age is equally a political choice. Mr. Chairman. It all points to the fact that this year nothing has been achieved about the beautiful purchasing power predictions, not for workers, not for benefit recipients and again not for pensioners. For pensioners, the downfall in 2018 was even double the disappointment of the average citizen. But that doesn't bother the cabinet. On the contrary. This battery of unfulfilled purchasing power predictions was not the beginning and will not be the end of the poison cup for pensioners. That poison cup must of course be completely empty, including the end of the pension system as we have known it for 40 years. It hurts to talk about it just today on my last Chamber day, one day after the appearance of a provisional pension scheme: provisional pension agreement. Many sacrifices have been made to maintain the pension system. For ten years, there has been no indexing. As a result, pensions have become de facto 20% lower. This applies to everyone, from pensioners to young workers. This missed indexing for young and old will never be overtaken. Several funds that were relatively poor have also had to cut short and even the retirement age has been raised as a blow, but it was not allowed to benefit. Nothing but nothing helps a capital-covered system against the scorched earth as a result of risk-free interest rates. On the basis of this national interest rate canard, therefore, there is a pension agreement, an agreement that shines away from it. Today we are experiencing the lowest ten-year interest rate ever in the Netherlands: minus 0.05%. The state gets the present. Security in pensions is being abolished, a security which, incidentally, never existed. For convenience, the cabinet ignores the fact that millions of people participate in a pension fund that does not have any buffers at all. They struggle with a coverage level just above or below 100%. It's just bullshit for this huge group that the discounts are off the track. It should be feared that many large pension funds, the big four in particular, will have to be cut down immediately, now, at the end of the year or at the end of next year, and also once the new system has been introduced. At the moment, the coverage rate of four large funds is below 100%, which means that they will have to be cut unconditionally and definitively at the end of the year and at the end of next year. I refer in particular to the metal at the end of the year. The two metal funds represent 2 million people, of whom 1.5 million are working and only 0.5 million are retired. They fear a 10% discount. Mr. Chairman. The employers are satisfied with this agreement. The premiums remain stable. They will no longer have to contribute to the maintenance of an additional 25%, but the premium will have to be covered. This is going to be a massive and extremely vulnerable renovation. In the case of an interest rate of 1%, a premium should be roughly doubled or the structure, the structure for the workers, should be halved. That is not going to happen, of course, and that would be a disaster for the workers, but until that is resolved, workers will continue to pay too little contribution compared to the pension they are building up, and that will be paid back by the pensioners. With this pension agreement, the Netherlands remains the country with the largest pension assets and with the lowest calculation rate in the world. The fact that the result is therefore already very shaky should not surprise anyone. All in all, there are more minions than pluses to be found in the draft agreement. The balance sheet is negative for 50PLUS. Solving the average problem is a plan, but the funding is not yet clear to me. Somewhere between 60 and 100 billion must be found. In any case, this is at the expense of the level of coverage of at least 4%, with all the consequences. I would like to say: first, give full clarity about the costs and the cover of those 60 to 100 billion before introducing them. It would have been even better to think first and not to decide until you know for sure what the consequences are. Then there is a specific problem with Europe. The question is whether the agreement still fits in with the European rules which gave the Netherlands an exception and give competition law for our pensions. Next thing you know, you solve a non-existent problem with a hugely complicated new build-up and you get the horse of Troy from an organized competition between insurance companies and pension funds. Mr. Chairman. The calculation rate remains cast in concrete. It's just a matter of faith. So what is the Dijsselbloem Commission doing? If yesterday in the agreement it was agreed that the premium should cover costs, then the interest on the premium is simply due to short-term and long-term interest rates. What happens to long-term interest rates for pension funds? Will it finally be aligned with the insurers or will we not get any advice from that committee for a long time? Mr. Chairman. I will be surprised if the FNV members vote for this agreement by a majority in the next few weeks. Suppose, as in the last ten years, the new system produces a 6% return, for example, then it takes ten years for that 6% return to be reflected in an increase in pensions. It's going very slowly. Moreover, this system was not so badly chosen in itself, because if it had existed in the last ten years, pensions would have been substantially increased on the basis of the actual rate of return of the last ten years, 7% each year. But if we only start after ten relatively good stock market years, then such a positive outcome for the future is far away and also very uncertain. I would say: trade unionists, count your buttons; still discounts and no indexation, especially because of that 60 billion claim. And the AOW age for young people in the new proposals still goes to almost 70 years, and we do not think that this is a wink. Mr. Chairman. It is not just the government that needs to prepare for bad times; it must also enable citizens to do so. The purchasing power in general is not an achievement of this cabinet. The burden burden is a fact, but precisely because it has risen so rapidly. The draft pension agreement builds on the extreme risk-avoiding interest rate vision that has been adopted in the Netherlands, but which is applied only as strictly when it comes to pensions: an accounting rate of 1%. Climate investment has a social discount rate of 3%. All right, everybody, listen up! Pensions 1%. Climate 3%. Power load in box 3: 5.5%. The pension contributions for young people are calculated at a rate of 2.8% and according to Capital in the 21st century of the French economist Thomas Piketty, all these interest rates are a gross underestimate of the actual return on capital. Mr President, I am almost at the end. The IRS. In the annual financial report for 2018, very little was said about the public authority that makes all these fine figures possible for 2018: the Tax Administration, five years ago the best public service, with high international standing. But under Rutte I, II and III this cork on which everything floats has lost its famous reputation. I hold Rutte responsible for that. This should have been chiefsache for years. The growing number of deficiencies identified by the Court of Auditors in 2018 is, of course, yet another humiliation for the service in conjunction with the policy holiday requested by the Secretary of State. Mr President, when you read my farewell letter you left a passage and now leave it to me to say it here: on 28 May, the Secretary of State stuck a letter on the door of the Tax Administration 'closed because of renovation, can still pay'. How could it have come to this? I will, of course, continue to follow this dossier intensively, I can assure you. Finally, Defense. A few rules, Mr. Chairman. It is today the commemoration of D-Day, also mentioned by others, 75 years ago. Our liberators are coming to visit, but our current defense personnel still have to do it without a proper collective agreement. This stalemate really needs to be broken. They deserve maximum appreciation. The fact that in the spring note the cabinet tried to ship our NATO associates with a tip of only 160 million is an insult which we can correct today. 50PLUS therefore proposes to abolish the RVU fine for Defense, releasing 150 to 175 million for our armed forces. I shall table a motion on this subject in the second term. Mr President, thank you for your leniency and apology for the overrun."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-06-06-tweedekamer-12.u59", "speech text": "Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I know the SGP as a highly financially sound party. According to Mr Stoffer, the public debt has to go even further down. But if I have counted just as quickly, there must be a billion or 6,7 for defense, 1 or 2 billion more for relief of charges, single workers and additional money for infrastructure. I wonder how the SGP thought it would fund this."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-06-06-tweedekamer-12.u68", "speech text": "The concern expressed by Mr Stoffer about defence and infrastructure has, in my view, been expressed by many parties here. But at the same time, the defense needs to go to 2%. Your group chairman regularly says 'we want more money to go there'. Then I find it hard to understand when you start your introduction with \"Well, well, Minister of Finance, aren't you a little too spacious; shouldn't you have another tooth?\" Then you have to point in the direction: where do you want to look for it? That is what I think is so balanced in a debate. I miss that now. On the one hand, wish lists are laid down, but on the other hand, there is no indication that this is not necessary to the decimal place where you want to get them."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-06-06-tweedekamer-12.u69", "speech text": "I believe that I have complimented the Minister of Finance for the fact that this year, too, the debt of the state has been brought back. I assume that policy will continue in the coming years. I think we're gonna see it go back a little bit. The fact that I address a number of cases here that we address every year is clear. We've always been clear about defense. If you have seen our election programme last time, you will have seen that we have properly covered it. Infrastructure is now a new issue. I don't think it's a huge amount of money. I can say wonderfully: you know, we transfer it from construction projects. But I think that's too easy. All kinds of commitments and political desires are established. I think you've got the whole country on you if you're gonna get some of that out of there. In fact, there are still a lot of wishes for projects that have not yet been covered. They're also in the coalition agreement. So I think that is too easy, but I agree with you that the coverage should be included when we talk clearly about how much we are talking about. You can rest assured that, if we need to do so later, we will take a strong interest in this. I totally agree that we are not going to get there with open ends, but I am far from wishing for a huge laundry list. These are two logical points, which I think we have always said a few things about. The maintenance is indeed a new point, but we are not talking about huge posts."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-06-06-tweedekamer-12.u103", "speech text": "Yeah, exactly. And again, there's a six-month trajectory. If you've been here since your third year of life, or... If you're born here, you can go into that trajectory where it can happen within six months. Dan DOD. The Minister for Finance is still talking about under-utilisation. But there were also some questions asked, among others by Mr Bruins, about expenditure, in the sense that it would not have been put well with the material readiness of Defence. We're dealing with a whole series of backlogs in the Defense Department. That is well known and is being worked on incredibly hard. Many additional resources have been made available in the coalition agreement. Work has been carried out, among other things, to put the investments in order, including in terms of conservation and recruitment. There's a big staff question behind that, too. Additional resources have also been made available in the Spring paper. 'We are not there yet', I say to the American ambassador, when he begins, and rightly so, about the Wales Pledge of 2%. Because the cabinet wants to see what we can spend extra on Defense in the future, and the Wales Pledge is about 2024 and not about 2019. But you're seeing a steady increase in defense spending. The 1.5 billion from the coalition agreement, now again the Spring Note, and we feel bound to Wales's commitments to work towards 2% by 2024. So that's just standing up. Recruitment is a top priority, as well as maintaining staff. It also looks at alternative ways of getting the work done. That can be both temporary and structural. Rental, outsourcing and co-operation with the market. I will not update on the collective agreement negotiations, because they are always precarious processes and they must now be followed up. Mr. Chairman. Then I think I have answered the questions about the monitor, the climate, education and defence and security to, so my impression is, more than complete satisfaction, because nobody gets angry."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-06-06-tweedekamer-12.u159", "speech text": "Thank you, Mr President. I would also like to thank Members for their questions. I will make a number of preliminary remarks, then specifically talk about first the Court of Auditors and then the burden and the economy, and then the CW and the supplementary item. Then there's one question about broad prosperity, then defense and investment. Finally, the other block, where \"other\" as often happens to be very rich and other cubes will prove to be rather limited. Before I go into the questions asked, it is good to note that the whole cabinet, but I, as Minister for Finance in particular, attach extraordinary value to this debate. I am also pleased that the Minister for Foreign Affairs is present at this debate. As a coordinating minister, it will answer all questions relating to ICT and information security. But I would like to emphasise, also to the Chamber, that ICT is really an issue that concerns every ministry, not least my own ministry, and that I know from experience how complex, persistent and extensive these problems are. Mr. Chairman. Public finances belong to all of us and to all of us. That is why it is so important that we report annually on the income and expenditure of the Empire. I would like to thank the General Court very much. I think they have left the lodge, but I would like to thank them very much for the advice and comments that keep us sharp. It is not always easy for colleagues in the cabinet and myself, it is sometimes confrontational, but it is always helpful. As Mr Van 't Wout said, it is also part of a mature democracy. I would very much like to join in that. Mr. Chairman. The Court of Auditors has, of course, said a lot about the shortcomings. I will say a few more about this in a moment, but let me make a few comments. There is a high degree of legitimacy in terms of expenditure and revenue. The Court of Auditors also endorsed this with a positive statement. We stay within the 1% margin of error. Many Members, Mr Nijboer, as well as Mr Stoffer and Mr Sneller, have pointed out that there is not only good news on this issue. I recognize that very much. Particular attention should be paid to the management of a number of departments. The number of deficiencies has also increased from 35 to 47 in business operations. Seven deficiencies have been resolved, 18 new ones have been added and 29 have not yet been resolved. There are also quite a lot of shortcomings in financial management. According to the Audit Service, the Court of Auditors confirms that there are no major fluctuations in financial management. Mr Azarkan, Mr Sneler, Mr Snels, Mr Nijboer, Mr Stoffer and Mr Van 't Wout all asked questions about financial management. I cannot go into every one of those pieces with all my colleagues now, but from my role it has my particular attention. In general, I would like to say that although on the one hand imperfections are a fact of life, as the Court of Auditors always explains to me when I asked a year ago how I got rid of a lot of those imperfections in a year, they said to me: have no illusions, if you have an imperfection, it usually stays with you for a few years this total palette asks for action from the cabinet. Each of the speakers I have just referred to also drew attention to this. This means that I will not be asking for specific attention in the cabinet next Friday, but in the next Friday, that I will draw attention to this in the Ministry of Finance, and that we simply have to get on with it. Mr. Chairman. I will continue in the Court of Auditors category. I think I answered Mr Van 't Wout's question by saying what we are going to do. To paraphrase him: I would, of course, not want the Prime Minister to be the prime prime minister in this century who would not get a positive statement and would also have to look at his finance minister. I hope that we have been able to address this immediately to the satisfaction of the VVD Group. Mr. Chairman. I believe that Mr Nijboer and Mr Sneller asked about the balance sheets. Quite rightly, that is what people are asking for. Something unfortunate happened there. The Secretary of State and I seem to be calling that Saturday prior to the Monday we sent that letter. That shows that something clearly did not go well there. As I have also informed the Chamber, this means that we will have to introduce the four-eyed principle even more clearly here and that we will take measures to prevent this problem. That calls for something from the Tax Office and possibly from the Audit Office of the Empire. What is reassuring in all of us is that no one has gotten into any kind of trouble, as the Secretary of State and I have also informed the Chamber. But I'm the first to admit it wasn't pretty. Mr. Chairman. Another point in the category of unlawfulness, which I believe several spokesmen asked for, among others Mr Van 't Wout. With regard to decentralisation payments, we are going to examine whether the Financial Ratio Act needs to be amended. Maybe one or two more comments on liability management. This is particularly a problem with the Treasury and the Defense Department. This simply means a task for these two ministries, including myself and my ministry, that we will have to steer better and, if necessary, use more capacity to get that right. Mr. Chairman. That brings me to the block on burdens and the economy."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-06-06-tweedekamer-12.u195", "speech text": "Quite precisely, for me, it is essential for the Chamber to be given the explanatory statement in accordance with 3.1. This is necessary for parliamentary discussion. This can be done in the budget itself, or in a separate letter. That is in no way in question to me. I will also draw attention in the monitoring to the explanatory notes on those transferred supplementary items. I hope the viewers at home can still follow. I think that's as far as I can go right now. I ask the whole of Snel for some understanding. Mr. Chairman. The Prime Minister has said almost everything and more about what was to be said about the Monitor Brede Prosperity. I think there's one thing Mr Snels left lying there. We've had a lot of contact with them in plenary. I would like to say to him that we will really pay attention to this in the Millions Note. That is not so much a repetition, but I think a refreshment and an addition to an earlier commitment I made to him. I think we all see the problem. I agree with the Prime Minister's reply when I say that it is not so easy to do so in a way that then makes sense with the Million Papers. But I'm really gonna work on that. I'll be in the under-utilization, in the Defense and IenW, and the investments there. The question by Mr Van Dijck, Mr Slootweg and Mr Sneller was why the money is not being spent. In fact, they didn't even ask so much why it isn't being spent, as how it can get money back. We still have the debate on the Spring Note ahead of us, but let me get it out of my head for the DOD. At DOD, we're making an additional investment. We believe, as a cabinet, that this is much needed, given the challenges that exist and given the Welsh Pledge. Of course, we consciously take into account the under-exhaustment that was there last year. For the record, I believe that 10 million will be added this year and that amounts to between 400 and 500 million, or a small half billion. Then it goes back to, again out of my head, 162 million structurally. We have therefore taken into account last year's under-exhaustment. By the way, the good news is that this money from the Defence Department will simply remain available and will also be spent in the coming years. The Prime Minister referred to that as well. Mr. Chairman. There were also a few questions about why, including Mr Slootweg and Mr Sneller. Mr Nijboer referred to this as well. After all, it's a combination of a number of things that make this play for the Defense Department and for Infrastructure. If you look at 2018 it has to do with the moment when the cabinet started. The cabinet started on 26 October 2017 and has deliberately wanted to be ambitious from the start. That means that much had to be done in that run-up. It has worked on a lot of subjects. The directors of Infrastructure and Defence have worked very hard on this, but that has not been fully achieved, I will simply be honest about it. At the same time, we have spent many billions more on all issues, but certainly also on these two. The second reason why things are going less fast than we want is that on these two issues there have been such huge sums of money and here you see the downside of something that we have previously described as very positive with each other, namely the state of the Dutch economy, combined with the fantastic employment we have at the moment. Had we had this money for infrastructure about five or six years ago, it would have been much easier to get builders to work. Then it would have been much easier to spend some of the money on the defense. We're dealing with this dynamic. After the discussion in the cabinet, I also looked explicitly with the Minister of Infrastructure and the Minister of Defence at what we can do to spend that money on good plans. The rulers are the first to want that very much, because they stand in front of their own shop and they want us to do those things that society needs, in this case safety and accessibility and transport."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-06-06-tweedekamer-12.u214", "speech text": "I will come back to this in the second term, but part of the 5.2 billion will be taken away. 2.2 billion of them go to infrastructure and defense. That's on the budget, and that means you have 3 billion left. I just want to know exactly which part of the 3 billion goes below that 1% standard, so that it does not damage expenditure, and which part goes to the repayment of public debt. I just think that's a very fair question. I have also asked this question a few times before, even in debates, but in the written answer I only get the answer: most of it goes with me. It's about 2 billion, and that's more than the Empire spends a year on the MBO! So it's a very reasonable question."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-06-06-tweedekamer-12.u236", "speech text": "Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you all for the first-term input. Surely it is a special time for me to be here as Minister of the Interior and Kingdom Relations. I even think it's a scoop in a way, but I think it's good and I think it's important. Questions have also been asked today about ICT, information security, business management. Traditionally, a large part of the debate is also about this, hence the agreement that I am also in charge of coordinating matters of this kind. I think that is a good step, but I also realise very well that this has given me a certain responsibility. Let me say straight away to all those who have raised the issues of ICT and information security here. In other words, I share their concern. That is why last October, the cabinet decided to give the Minister of State extra powers in this area and to tackle the problems with real authority. I sent a letter to the Chamber in October. That is the way we want to deal with it. That won't solve it overnight. I am not under any illusions at all on this point, but we think that we have taken a step in the right direction. I'm going to go through the questions that have been asked about this and start with Mr Van 't Wout, who also spoke about it first. He asked the cabinet, and in particular me, to really come up with a clear and convincing plan on how we're going to improve that information security. He also asked to make the Chamber clear not only how we do that, but also to provide a planning. He asked for interim reports. Other members then made similar comments. I sent a multi-annual plan to the Chamber in February. We call that the Strategic I Agenda 2019-2021. That's what it's about. This is an approach consisting of state-wide measures. How do we improve control? How do we improve and share knowledge and skills? How can we attract ICT talent? In short, a plan of action including firm measures. And that, as far as I'm concerned, is the starting point, the starting point from which we have to work. By the way, there is an AO scheduled on 3 July, the AO Functional State Service, in which these pieces are scheduled. Information security and ICT are not just tough and complex subjects, but are also subjects that are actually constantly moving. I believe that Mr Van 't Wout asked: can you say that before 1 January this year it will be much better or perhaps it will be resolved? I'm sure if I promised that, I'd promise too much. I couldn't live up to that. However, I can promise that we will take firm measures and map them in a structural manner, just as we need to better identify the vulnerabilities of the ICT systems of the Empire. In other words, what I can say is that we have a plan of action and that we take these measures in a structured and joint manner, that is to say with all the other colleagues from the cabinet. And there's a coordination at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. I would also like to say that your Chamber will be informed of this in a letter in the autumn. It will describe the progress of all these state-wide measures on ICT, on information security. And, of course, I will also say that the recommendations of the Court of Auditors, which are simply knocking down in the individual departments, are being taken up and monitored. So it must not be lost, without any insight, but the departments must take the actions they have to take, and they must follow the recommendations of the Court of Auditors. We need to monitor this and I will ensure that your Chamber will also be informed of this by means of a progress report in the autumn. Mr. Chairman. Mr Sneller of D66 pointed out that ICT and information security deficiencies were higher this year. That's right. I can't take anything away from that either. The rise is probably partly caused by the fact that the world is changing and that new things are being asked of the government. But at least it is a clear signal that we really need to get to work in order to guarantee that necessary level of information security. And the most pressing flaws must be addressed as quickly as possible. It is never nice to hear from the Court of Auditors that there are shortcomings, and it is certainly not nice to hear that there are more, across the board, and also in my own department. But it's a good thing we know, because what you know, you can handle it. So we are also in the mood to do so. Mr Slootweg also asked about this report, which I already made a commitment about in the direction of Mr Van 't Wout. Mr Slootweg suggested reporting four times a year. My proposal would be to do it twice a year, also just to not overburden the reporting burden. I hope that Mr Slootweg and others can live with that. Of course, as much of the commitment as possible should go to the actual improvement of information security and ICT, but I am very aware that the Chamber has expectations and that it can only monitor them if they are reported on a regular basis. So my proposal is to do that twice a year. Mr Snels asked: why can't you really identify how much government spends on maintaining certain systems? Can I make better arrangements about the administration within that government? This is an understandable question, and I think it is right. But the Court of Auditors also says that it is not easy to collect information about ICT management and its costs. And there's something else going on. I think we often focus on the major ICT projects, and thus less on management in its entirety. IT is basically everywhere, and everything behind it. Sometimes you start with a project that applies to me and to my colleagues because you want to change or improve something, or because you have been given a new task, and that is a lot of attention. But of course there will also be a lot of costs in ICT management because, as I said, ICT is actually behind everything. That's a bit underexplained, isn't it? But we've started. For example, in collaboration with the Tax Administration, we are now testing in a pilot form with the inclusion of ICT management activities on the state-wide ICT dashboard, so that we can get a more complete picture. In that strategic agenda that I just mentioned, it says that I want a thorough evaluation and a further development of the Rijks ICT dashboard, because I think that dashboard provides the steering information that can structurally improve accountability about the management and accountability about the maintenance that has to be done. But you're gonna have to build up and make up for that control information first. So I will be able to set additional frameworks, where necessary, based on this new way of working, with the additional powers laid down by the Minister for Foreign Affairs, without losing sight of the diversity of the entire ICT landscape. Mr. Chairman. Mr Bruins of the Christian Union also had a number of more specific questions. He asked why I do not create a generic framework for governance, risk and compliance for IT management within the Empire. He also asked how you could continue to work on the same point that Mr Snels made, namely the responsibility for the maintenance of ICT. Could you standardize that further? Are we still able to make concrete agreements on this further along this route? In response to his rather specific questions, I would like to say a little more generically that I agree with that, but we must realise that I know that Mr Bruins does this like no other, that ICT within the government is so diverse and so complex. I have just said that the Court of Auditors agrees with that. It remains the case that the ministries themselves are responsible for their ICTs and should even be able to make demands on their ICTs to do justice to their own responsibilities, but that I do see and agree that it is really necessary to be able to manage the risks properly. I therefore hope that this dashboard, which I have just mentioned, will provide us with the necessary steering information, so that we will indeed be able to report better and structuralally, including to your Chamber, on the ICT systems in the future. Moreover, the Court recommended that better arrangements be made between the CIO Rijk and the CIOs of the departments on information sharing. I think that is also a very logical follow-up. So I take this recommendation to heart and I would like to take it on board. As a result, Mr Bruins also said, at least he suggested that perhaps you should have management in order before starting new projects. That's a logical thought. He also suggested that BIT should play a role in this. First of all, every minister, every ruler, must make that assessment. That sounds good to me, too. There are projects that are intended to replace old systems or some old systems, but of course new projects are also needed because of new services, because of new wishes, things that we want to do or which we have agreed here with each other that we will do but which are not yet there, and which also require a system. So every time that consideration has to be made. The BIT is already fully involved in the review of ICT projects. I do know that Mr Raymond Knops, the Secretary of State for BZK, who is formally responsible for BIT, will present a letter in the autumn on the future positioning of BIT. He will deal with a number of issues. I shall pass on Mr Bruins' comment to him, so that he can perhaps come back to that. Mr. Chairman. Then there are a number of things that are a little bit more about the state's personnel policy. Mr Alkaya, as well as others, have asked questions about this and found that there are staff shortages in certain public services. Of course, that's just a fact. The Court of Auditors has said that there should actually be a better and more strategic human resources policy with the Empire. Mr Alkaya and Mr Bruins have also said that it is important for the cabinet to ensure that the government is an attractive employer, that people want to work there. I think the Empire is indeed a very attractive employer. For anyone who wants to work with passion on the public cause, there is very interesting work at the government. Fortunately, the Empire also scores well in investigations into attractive employership. We have had research done, and that has also been shared with the Chamber. This research is translated again by the departments into the various multi-annual staff plans that they should have completed by the end of this year. In other words, I very much support the objective that we must do everything we can to remain an attractive employer. Things like the common traineeship and the labour market campaigns for ICTs are examples of how we can and should do that, given the current labour market. Of course, you can go wider. The investments just mentioned by both the Prime Minister and Mr Hoekstra are, of course, important to us, but they are also investments in a sector in which people are needed and in which people have to shape policy. They have an incredibly important task; a public task. We have to do everything we can to make people want and work there. Mr. Chairman. I've already said something about what the Empire is doing to be attractive as an employer. Maybe there's something else I can add. Mr Van 't Wout specifically asked for this. He talked about competition that could occur between different parts of the Empire. We are indeed aware of that. However, it is sometimes good to start highly targeted recruitment campaigns, but then it is wise not to compete with each other if you know that you are fishing in the same pond. That's what's gonna happen. Think about police and defense. You'd better hang out. The same applies to ICT. There is no point in competing with each other to bring in the scarce ICT talent we need. That's why we started a state-wide ICT training program. Mr Snels was somewhat concerned about the quality of service, also as a result of successive cuts that he had pointed out. It was just about that: you can see that wage developments in the public sector are following wage developments in the market. We know the bottlenecks there. We also know that there are different collective bargaining tables. We know that the sectors mentioned receive a cabinet contribution each year based on the average contract wage development in the market. That's the system we work with. In general, that appears to be sufficient. I would like to comment on a suggestion made by Mr Sneller. He said that if we go on like this, the women in the government won't get along very well. The same could be said of financial spokesmen, but that would of course be very faint and do no justice at all to the quality of the input of the financial spokesmen today. But I noticed. Mr Sneller said: perhaps you should agree that in every application committee from scale 14, I think he said a woman should sit. I actually think that's a nice idea. In any case, it supports my policy of getting as many women as possible into top positions. It's not bad, but it's not getting anywhere. We all know that the composition of application committees matters. So I'm taking that suggestion with me and I'm going to see how I can anchor that state-wide, because I do think it could contribute to the goal. Mr President, I think I have answered the questions that remain."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-06-12-tweedekamer-8.u7", "speech text": "The coalition's line of defense is apparently that there should be a letter within a week. That's excellent news. Well, at least we know this is gonna happen. Would it be acceptable to the CDA if, in the end, regional broadcasters went bankrupt before the letter with these measures was published?"}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-06-18-tweedekamer-2.u52", "speech text": "The cabinet does that. The government reduces income tax on balance by more than the increase in VAT, including the increase in health insurance contributions. The cabinet invests a lot more in matters such as education and care, in roads, police, defense. These are all public sectors that have had a hard time in the crisis, which have been affected. Now that things are going well, it should be invested in again. I'd love to do more. At the same time, putting public finances in order is also crucial, so that if there is ever another crisis, I hope it is far away and preferably not at all, you will be able to cope with it again. The promise, the core promise I made with the Labour Party in 2012 was to make the Netherlands emerge stronger from the crisis. The Netherlands has emerged more strongly from the crisis. It's time to make people feel that, too. The government does a lot and will like to do more, but also companies, especially the large companies, have to make their contribution."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-06-18-tweedekamer-34.u2", "speech text": "Thank you, Mr President. This debate is taking place on the eve of the European summit on where we want to go with Europe over the next five years. I think it is appropriate to consider Europe's values at the beginning of the debate. What is this cooperation based on? It is about solidarity, peace, security and prosperity. In this context, I believe that we, as a Chamber, should also consider what has happened with our neighbours in Germany. There was a colleague of ours murdered, a colleague of the CDU. As we understand this week, this has been done for political reasons or is taken into account by the German justice system. Ties to neo-Nazis with the perpetrator or the suspected perpetrator have been proven. I would ask the Prime Minister to express our support and solidarity with Germany in the direction of his colleague and in the direction of the next of kin there and also to express firm support at that European Council that we will do all we can to fight against this kind of extremism and to ensure that we in Europe are protected from this kind of terror that is now directed against one of our colleagues. Mr. Chairman. Looking at what we have to do, it is important to realise that 70% of the people of Western Europe have not experienced a real rise in income since 2004, while the economy, which has experienced a crisis, has long been growing again. We see that the profits of companies are really back in order, we see the shareholders celebrating, we see the top men of the companies celebrating. It's often the same thing. It is important to do something about this if you want to understand and fight the discontent about Europe. The Prime Minister's plea in his other political capacity therefore requires a follow-up. This is not only a Dutch problem, but it plays a role throughout Western Europe and is partly the result of a policy, a culture, in Europe where these companies have always been facilitated to allow workers to compete on lower labour costs, not to seek that competition in value added but at as low a cost as possible. We must also press for measures and develop proposals at European level to ensure that a more real proportion of profits reach the working class in the Netherlands, in Europe. In this context, I find it disappointing that one important point is missing from the strategic agenda, whereas the European Commission had previously advocated putting it on the agenda. The whole social pillar, the whole need to protect workers in all respects, seems to have disappeared from the strategic agenda, while all other issues return. I would like to ask the Prime Minister to call for this item to be fully on the agenda; even more so, for concrete proposals to be made. We adopted the Ploumen motion in December 2017. We know from the Prime Minister that he relies on that agenda on himself. It is important to include this in the strategic agenda, because this is a little bridge to the nasty Brexit subject, which indeed resembles a feuilleton of an extremely bad television series \"brexit\" which is partly caused by dissatisfaction with labour migration. That discontent doesn't go away if we just say to the British, \"What an idiot you're doing.\" It goes away if you make sure people are properly paid for their work and progress in Europe. With the election of a new main figure, however lamentable, there in that Brexit soap, I am afraid we must also take more and more account of a hard Brexit. The question to which we are now well prepared and to what extent we are protecting the Dutch working class, I would therefore like to give to the Prime Minister. Mr. Chairman. The European elections, which had a higher turnout and a very diverse outcome, seem to have gone well in the Netherlands, but we are seeing more and more reports that efforts have been made by the Russian authorities or by other Russian actors to influence European voters. For example, there was a message that more than 240 million people are confronted with deliberately distributed fake news. I think that the time has come to send out a somewhat louder signal from Europe than just to talk about it with the tech companies. It is yet another attempt to interfere in a democratic process, the second largest democratic process we know in the world. We're gonna have to protect that. That's gonna take defense. That too is a European value that we must stand for. Finally, Mr President. Just for the next five years, I would like to call on the Cabinet to emphasise an agenda of protection, freedom and prosperity. This means that not only in the Netherlands, but also in the rest of Europe, people should go above multinationals. It would be worth a sweet thing to me if it were transferred from the festival halls to the meeting rooms where the decisions can be made. Thank you."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-06-19-tweedekamer-8.u81", "speech text": "That is what I rhyme with each other very well, because I have also informed you that it is not just about helping these people in this category, but at the same time freeing up time and capacity at the CBR to help the other target groups. Of course, I do not know how much acceleration that will lead to, but it is clear that it is getting better and that we can also help those people, for example the self-defense."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-06-26-tweedekamer-7.u26", "speech text": "I'm afraid you'll be able to sit down for a while. Mr. Chairman. This law does not provide a fundamental review with priority for restoring and protecting our living environment. On the contrary, it's more of the same. This law literally makes change from our nature. The PAS policy, which has recently been annulled by the Council of State, shows that ecology is literally suffocated by our economic ambitions, that economic growth is not the solution, but the problem itself, and that trees that grow into the sky and cows with golden horns are not the result of a happy coincidence, but of unbridled greed at the expense of the life that surrounds us and that is becoming more and more at risk. The objective of the PAS to regulate nature conservation and the area for economic growth and economic activities proved to be a prime excuse for expanding intensive livestock farming around sensitive areas, continuing to expand highways and increasing speeds. Everything at the expense of nature. Nature values were secured according to the principleless principle \"who lives, who cares,\" a wretched political compromise of Ger Koopmans and Diederik Samsom as a ticking nitrogen bomb among everything that grows and blooms. The Dutch merchant spirit with the approval of a former Greenpeace activist who was stuck in what he himself called \"the gravel bin of raw reality.\" The hazing of political ideals, smothered in the political recklessness of the polder model. Mr. Chairman. I am thinking here of this aspect, because this is precisely the same double objective that we are also reading back in the Environment Act. History repeats itself, based on completely unrealistic wishful thinking from the short-sightedness that it will take our time. The Environment Act has two objectives: protecting and exploiting the environment. But can the Minister guarantee that this law is nitrogen proof? Does the Minister see conflicting circumstances which could lead to legal bodies disqualifying this law in the near future, as has happened with the PAS, on which only four years ago the glass was raised as if it were the egg of Columbus? Does this law provide sufficient protection for nature, so we won't be back here in a few years, crying about spilling milk? Mr. Chairman. Looking back at almost ten years of Rutte, but certainly after the coalition parties' statements last week, there is no confidence in my group that protecting the environment in this law will ever be put above exploiting it, that nature will be protected when the economy knocks on the door. According to a MP of the VVD, the sea is mainly meant to transport goods and make a good living. In his vocabulary there is nothing about protecting vulnerable natural areas, the intrinsic value of marine life or protecting everything of value that is defenseless against the unbridled economic ambitions. Money that's stupid makes right what's crooked. Earlier the VVD said that we have enough nature in the Netherlands with the Veluwe and the Wadden Sea and that the rest can be exchanged for the construction of more business areas, residential areas and roads. When the judge made it clear that after years of economic development at the expense of nature that literally suffocated nature in our nitrogen production, his colleague, Mr Weverling, here, stated that the balance between nature and economy had gone missing. We should see if we don't have too many nature reserves and rules in the Netherlands. After all, entrepreneurs must be able to undertake, according to the VVD. Nature is too expensive to protect, nature is there to make change from. Mr. Chairman. The Minister of IenW also said that where economic development came to an end, we should come up with a new ruse. She put an army of lawyers on it. Not to respect the ruling of the Supreme Court and to focus on a sustainable policy change, but to circumvent that ruling. That is total anarchy in the service of commercial interests, ignoring everything that really has value. Greed reigns. The judge says we're causing serious damage to nature. And what follows is no mea culpa and an army of ecologists to repair the damage done. No, an army of lawyers is being rigged to come up with a ruse to murmur and ignore the crystal clear statement of the Council of State. 'Marketing' is called that, in etymology from the Latin'mercatare', in the use of speech mainly 'dealing in the sense of shattering, not taking it so closely', in this case not taking it so closely with the judgments of our highest court."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-07-03-tweedekamer-14.u2", "speech text": "Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Two interruptions or those four shorts is indeed a bit little, but yes well... We are discussing the Spring Paper today, President, and we are seeing the economy cool down. The rack's out. The mood among the purchasing managers has also turned and reached the lowest point in six years, just above 50, and that doesn't predict much good. And consumer confidence is also negative for the first time in four years. In this Spring note we see that all rosy predictions are substantially adjusted downwards. The economy does not grow by 2.6% but by 1.5%, consumption does not grow by 2.3% but by 1.3% and purchasing power does not grow by 1.6% but by 1.2%. Tough adjustment down. People therefore have little confidence in it. That is understandable, because every year their golden mountains are promised, but none of it ends up. And after the acid comes sweet, remember? Everyone's gonna notice that things are getting better economically. It should have been there a long time ago, but for the third year in a row it has remained sweet for the people and by the time it has to be sweet, we are already in a next recession and we can write the sweet weather on our belly. Mr. Chairman. That's the way it goes over and over again and again. For example, the Spring note shows a great windfall of 1.5 billion and the surplus is 7 billion this year. That is almost 10 billion and there is no shortage of money. But where's that money going? Not to the people, that much is clear. It'll go to a children's pardon. There will be 150 million to the asylum industry, 318 million extra to Brussels and 400 million extra to the climate. Defense gets 1.2 billion, while there are billions left on the shelf. But again nothing for the people of this country, when you see that the purchasing power promise of 1.6% is not reached. Then why not intervene now, I ask the Minister. The money is there, only the strength is lacking. Mr. Chairman. Because of the wrong policy of this cabinet with all its burden increases, prices rise even more than wages. How do you get it done? And yelling that everybody's gonna feel better. People do feel something: they feel cheated. That's what they feel. This minister raises VAT on messages and increases taxes on energy, and then he is surprised that inflation is rising faster than wages! He does it himself. The cabinet also presents itself as a \"good news\" cabinet, but first Rutte together with Asscher has completely cut the costs and increased the burden by 16 billion. And now Wobke Hoekstra comes to stick the patches. First of all, it is hard to clean up defence, education, care for the elderly and youth, and now it is supposed to make a generous gesture by adding money. And then try to sell this as good news. One example is the energy bill. If we all have to believe it, it will go down by \u20ac100 next year, after it went up by \u20ac334 earlier this year. Or take the nurses: there will be 100,000 nurses, but after 77.000 nurses have been fired in a previous cabinet period. You shouldn't have fired them! First, we cut back 0.5 billion on the police, then we cut back 0.25 billion and now we cut back 111 million. What is it? They do nothing, but Secretary Hoekstra's Band-Aids are usually too little too late. Also at the VVD they are completely lost. \"Working Netherlands earns lower taxes\" has now become Europe's burden champion. The collective burden has never been so high. The burden increased twice as much in the Netherlands as in the rest of Europe. They also turn on all points of view, in order to become foolhardy. A few examples. \"Hands off the mortgage interest rate deduction'. Remember? And then put the axe in it. \"Never drive a bill, never never\" is now \"must be, after 2026.\" Or abolishing the dividend tax. That was \"a must, a necessary evil.\" And yet it doesn't have to be now. A CO tax would be detrimental to the climate of establishment, and yet it is not that bad if we believe the climate agreement. \"Windmills run on subsidy,\" but let's fill the Netherlands with those things! Mrs Lodders said in the last AO about the fiscal policy agenda that she did regret the VAT increase, but this morning I heard her say at BNR that she regretted the bpm increase. Then don't raise those taxes! I think Mrs Lodder regrets being part of the VVD, the party of charges. Look at the energy bill I already said it or the extra labor discount: \u20ac1,000 extra promise, and then the VVD thinks it's crazy that people no longer have faith in politics! Mr. Chairman. Meanwhile, the lap machine is working overtime. Yesterday we said goodbye to MP number 32 since this cabinet took office. They've been going on for over a year and 32 MPs have already left this house, one in five makes the defense. They're looking for a nice job as mayor, alderman or at the United Nations, as long as they can. This speaks volumes. The coalition isn't there for the people in this country, it's there for itself. A working man can pay, even pay too much. Last year we all paid EUR 11.3 billion too much. This year we pay EUR 7 billion too much. That's 18 billion too much tax money collected in two years! That is not a \u20ac1,000 extra, that is \u20ac1,000 off for every Dutchman. One in three Dutch people has serious money worries in 2019, and this minister is touches 18 billion too much! Pure theft, chairman. Since the start of the crisis, public expenditure has increased by 50 billion, but in that period the burden on citizens doubled, while the burden on business fell. So the citizens paid the 50 billion bill in full. It is therefore not surprising that yesterday Laura of Spirit of the CPB, who at last woke up, said the alarm clock about the imbalance between the tax burden on labour and that on capital. She even warned of the tax morale because of the rising burden on labour, while those on capital remained the same. The cake has not been distributed fairly in the Netherlands for decades and I have been calling for attention to this for years: the so-called AIQ problem. Is the Minister finally gonna fix this? It can't be that you've been billing the citizens and leaving business alone for 20 years. The burden on labour is simply too high in the Netherlands. And then you can say that wages must be raised, but if you skim more than half of every euro's increase in wages to the treasury, then that doesn't get us anywhere. I quote someone who has researched this: \"that explains why household net disposable income is lagging behind rising gross wages,\" says Widmar Bolhuis of Leiden University. In other words, in my own words: the Dutch pay their taxes and everything we get is immediately skimmed by the mob gang of Rutte cum suis. Finally, Mr President, something about multinationals. During a hearing it became clear that they are indeed not paying any tax at all. The Philipsen, the Akzos, the Unilevers and the Shells of this world don't pay anything to the treasury. They do benefit from the beautiful infrastructure, from the well-educated population, from the good care for their expats, but they don't contribute, and they can't. A cashier at Albert Heijn pays even more taxes than Shell, Unilever, Akzo and Philips combined. What's Menno Snel, the second man at the Treasury, gonna do about that? It scared me. Nothing at all. He doesn't think it's necessary. I quote him: \"For the time being, I am pleased with the situation we are in.\" What's this? Can the Minister pick this up, for God's sake? Because we don't have to expect much from the Secretary of State. It does not intend to put the multinationals in the way of one straw, so much is clear. I hope the Minister will pick up that signal. Thank you."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-07-03-tweedekamer-14.u31", "speech text": "Mr. Chairman. If large companies are not quick to raise wages, then we should remove the reduction in the tax on profits. That was about the Prime Minister's words a few weeks ago. Does the Minister of Finance agree with the Prime Minister? How is he going to shape this in the budget preparation? Is he going to look at the CPB estimates in August as soon as possible and then put the deletion of the Vpb reduction on the table? This debate is, of course, about the very heart of social discontent. The Minister himself has sometimes made comments about the excessive wage increases in CEOs of large companies, and this is also part of the discontent and unfair distribution of wealth. But if, as a cabinet, you invest billions in burden relief for companies while people's purchasing power is lagging behind because the messages are getting more expensive and the energy bill is rising, you also have a problem. The threat to large companies is justified, but what role does the government play in all these blocked collective agreements in the public sector? In the case of the Defense Department, it seems to have been resolved, but what about the various collective agreements in education and care? In my view, it is the combined challenge facing this cabinet: to ensure an energy transition that achieves the climate goals while at the same time ensuring that people also feel that they are benefiting from an increase in broad prosperity. Mr. Chairman. This cabinet does good things, too. This Spring note contains quite a lot of policy additions. The presentation of the Spring paper was also accompanied by great words: more money for youth care, more for education and more for defence. There are major bottlenecks in the public sector and we have often had a debate on this in the last two years, but now a number of steps are being taken and that is good. I do think we should be honest about the figures. Against the pluses are also loves. Let me give you three examples. I'll start with Child Services. Firstly, I noticed that the cabinet presented the intensification as an investment of 1 billion. In my view, that was a press release from the Finance Minister's colleagues. What do you mean, an investment of 1 billion? It's just a series of over 400 million and then another two years 300 million. We're not saying that the government is cutting profits tax by 12 billion, are we? Why this rhetorical trick? I actually think that the Finance Minister should look into this with his colleagues. There's a minus in the numbers because of the stair-on-strap-afsystematiek. Municipalities get more money for youth care, but less from the accres: 74 million less than expected on Princess Day, 249 million less than expected for 2020 and 388 million in 2021. Or, as colleagues of the finance minister in the cabinet would say, 711 million less acres if you add up the three years together. How does the Minister of Finance judge this? Does he think it is right that we should take another look at this system? It's still weird that you give with one hand and take with the other hand. One more example. The police are an important priority for this cabinet. In the coalition agreement, 267 million more were promised, but in the spring note we also see the minions. The salary/price adjustment is not awarded but used for a job assignment on JenV. This adjustment means for the police a minus of 18.5 million in the years 2019 to 2025. Additional funds promised for counter-terrorism and auxiliary officers, 33 million, are also being postponed. Among others, Mayor Aboutaleb of Rotterdam wrote us a letter of fire. What's your answer to him? Is this also giving with one hand and taking with the other hand? And that while the defense is getting more and more money, it is unclear what this should be spent on and where money remains on the shelf. How does the Minister rhyme with Understanding Quality and Careful Policy? I thought we were gonna do that differently. Then higher education and universities. In the Spring paper an advance is made on the results of the recent opinion of the Van Rijn Committee. This committee has recommended additional investments for beta technology and there is broad political support for this. But in the short term, especially in the year 2019, there is great uncertainty at universities about the consequences of this policy. The cabinet wants to make a soft landing of the financial impact of this advice on universities and, for scientific education, it will allocate 27 million. On the other hand, there is a reduction in the wage/price adjustment of 25.1 million for scientific education. Give it with one hand, take it with the other. During the note-taking meeting last Monday, it remained unclear what the effects of redistribution would be and it was not substantiated by the Minister of Education why redistribution should take place now while the adequacy of funding still needs to be investigated. How does this fit in with careful decision-making? Is this what the Minister means by Understanding Quality or Article 3.1 of the Compatibility Act? I have made an amendment to this with Mr Westerveld. Our amendment deletes the discount on the salary adjustment for academic education for 2019 and only for 2019. The coverage of 25.1 million is found in the 220 million of windfalls in 2019 that this cabinet wants to use to fill the in=terminal. This is in line with the government's budgetary rules, as I say to the Minister. This amendment literally buys time for careful decision-making in the 2020 budget. I therefore hope for the support of the cabinet and the coalition. This is an opportunity to do this decision-making properly and carefully and to remove the unrest at universities. Thank you, Mr. Chairman."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-07-03-tweedekamer-14.u38", "speech text": "No, I'm being put in my mouth now. When it comes to defense, we haven't spent the money that should be spent for years and there's a catch-up mission. It turns out that the Ministry did not succeed in 2018, especially because there has been too much savings in the past, to spend that money. I hope this will work in 2019. Mr. Chairman. I'm moving on. A thorn in the middle class meat is the high collective burden. How does all income support outside income tax count in this indicator, e.g. care allowance, rent allowance and childcare allowance? These are formal expenses and they therefore count in the picture of government expenditure. However, 5 billion of healthcare payments feel like a different type of collective spending than development cooperation. How pure is the collective burden burden as an indicator of income support outside of income tax and how high would this collective burden be if we had designed supplements differently, for example as a tax deduction measure? Mr. Chairman. In addition to the money in the wallet, the housing is the most discussed point in society. The Spring paper pays little attention to this. With regard to the CDA, how can more homes be built, especially for start-ups and seniors? The construction plan is central to us. But we also see competition, especially between the starter and the private investor. The Telegraaf came today with the message that in recent years homes have been massively hijacked by private investors for starters. Are you sure there's nothing you can do about this? Mr. Chairman. If the Empire spends less money than it intended, it will continue to work in the budgets of municipalities. This is a logical consequence of how we regulated the relations between the Empire and the municipalities. Take joint responsibility in times of prosperity and adversity, stairs up, stairs down. However, I can imagine the annoyance of many aldermen. The city council has just agreed to your beautiful multi-annual budget, and then it turns out the Empire could have spent too little. As a result: sometimes up to \u20ac34 less per inhabitant and you can go back to the city council. The VNG is clear; it does not want to change this system, share this system of joint financial responsibility on the general benefit. However, because, for example, the budget of youth care and the Wmo is also included in the general benefit, the step-on-step scheme has an increasing impact on municipal finances. What is the Minister's view of more stabilisation by examining whether there are variations of the step-on-step system that do not take away the principle but which may lead to less fluctuations in the budgets for municipalities? Mr. Chairman. A good steward has his performance in order. Much cynicism of our residents is due to the performance of implementation organisations. The Court of Auditors and the Ombudsman call for more attention to be paid to this. Try extending your driving licence as a 75-year-old in this country or driving off as a youngster with a light form of autism. There is a dysfunctional CBR, not to mention the UWV. From the Tax Administration, the Court says that the desires for new policies cannot be met due to a shortage of IT staff. This affects democracy. But there is also the idiotism that as a tax return filler you need two different authorisation codes: one to be able to fill in a tax return and one to be able to apply for surcharges. On page 10 of the Spring Note, with regard to the performance of the implementation organisation, it is stated that a task force is engaged in problem analysis and scenarios for solution directions. They should be ready by 2020. Mr. Chairman. In part, we really can't wait that long. Can a first report with desirable measures, perhaps already with low-hanging fruit, be sent along with the 2020 Millions Note? With regard to its own ministry for the fiscal year 2020, can it not be ensured that volunteers from, for example, older organisations only have to work with one authorisation code for both the declaration and the application of fees for their members, elderly people or people with language disadvantages? The Minister describes the importance of strong buffers in government, because our economy is very sensitive to economic shocks. According to the Council of State, this also partly relates to the debt position of households and businesses. An important cause of the debt position of our residents is located in the mortgages. Households have a debt of 105% of GDP. The EU says that you should strive for a debt of up to 65% of GDP for households. In the Netherlands, the mortgage debt is the cause of 86% of that debt. But is this 20% non-hypothecary debt actually in line with debt in other EU countries? The previous cabinet has taken many measures to reduce mortgage debt. Are these measures likely to reduce 86% in the coming period? Mr. Chairman. The concept of steward has not only a financial dimension, but also a green dimension. During the debate on accountability, I indicated that I was particularly pleased that there was so much interest in the green bond. It offers the opportunity to involve financial markets in making our economy climate-proof. Climate change entails major financial risks. A report by EenVandaag recently showed that farmers in Zeeland suffer economic damage by salinisation of the soil. The Frankfurt School has developed a Finance fit for Paris benchmark. This benchmark has previously looked at the extent to which legislation and regulations for the financial sector are climate-proof in Germany and the European Union. Unlike for example in France, Dutch financial institutions report relatively little on the climate risks of their portfolio in their reporting. During a meeting of the Sustainable Finance Lab, DNB director Frank Elderson expressed a positive opinion on the application of such a benchmark to the Dutch financial sector. How does the Minister intend to have Dutch legislation for the financial sector assessed annually on a \"Finance fit for Paris\" benchmark? Mr. Chairman. I am well aware that today's questions and proposals will not suddenly make everyone rich and that the middle class, the hinge of our society, will not be free of all worries. For this to happen, more fundamental errors in the economic structure need to be changed. We can do this partly ourselves, but in part we also depend on cooperation with countries and institutions that sometimes have a different agenda. But that does not discharge us, within these narrow margins, from the task of finding majorities that make this particular group of people feel that politics is there for them."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-07-03-tweedekamer-14.u72", "speech text": "That's what I thought I understood. That is exactly why we want to present this. Mr. Chairman. Mr Snels asked about the investment in youth care and why it was presented as 1 billion. I think I have just tried to answer the question of whether the problem in youth care is temporary or structural. That's what the investigation has to prove. That is why the cabinet has decided to meet the municipalities with a series of 420 this year and then two times 300. I think that's probably where the confusion comes from. I think we can both hold on to what we mean about that investment. Mr. Chairman. Then Mrs De Vries asked how the defense will use the extra resources and when there is more clarity. Defence has set out priority capacity objectives in the NATO National Plan. That's just a fixed list that included the F35s, but also the special forces and cyber. We have explicitly agreed that part of the additional resources will be invested in staff. In my view, Mrs De Vries herself referred to the fact that there was or seems to be very recent white smoke............................................................................................................................................................................................................................................ That sounds like excellent news. Mr. Chairman. GroenLinks also had a question about Defense, but the inspiration was, I think, just another one. It's also in the party's DNA, I think, to look at it differently. The question was about understanding quality: how do we make careful policy? Then I'm actually back to the phaser answer. The cabinet does believe that more needs to be done in the field of defence, also taking into account the insecurity in the world and the idea of taking responsibility for itself, including towards our NATO partners. But I understand very well that Mr Snels and others say: but the money was already not coming up. That is precisely the reason for looking very closely with the Defense Department at what is a rise that is reasonable and probably can also be observed. Mr. Chairman. Both Mr Snels and Mr Slootweg asked if I would agree to look again at the standardisation system and the indexation of the Municipal Fund, the whole step-on-step discussion. I have to say quite frankly that I am a little bit confused with that, because it was precisely the VNG who also indicated to us in the recent discussions on youth care that he wanted to stick to the step-on-step approach. I understand the inconvenience in itself. I think Mr Nijboer has explained more broadly what many of us, at least sometimes, hear when we are in contact with fellow party members or others who are active locally. But the VNG sees benefits and I understand them. On the one hand, you can say that it is strange that the municipality gets something out of it when national politics decides to invest extra in, for example, defence or education, or vice versa, and that it should be at the expense of the local swimming pool if national politics decides to cut back. But in a world of imperfections, this is still a solution that may be the least bad. I am prepared to think about everything in my own right, but from the VNG's point of view that makes sense."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-07-04-tweedekamer-40.u25", "speech text": "Thank you, Madam President. The cheapest does not have to be the best and safest, and I fear that this will be the case again. The PVV has so far advocated the roll-out of 5G under some conditions. From the very beginning we have always been very consistent and consistent in this regard, we have expressed our concerns about cooperation with foreign companies at all. We've said that before. When it comes to state security and privacy of our citizens, we must try as much as possible to regulate all this ourselves, and if it is not possible, they must be reliable partners. Even before there was a big fuss about cooperation with the Chinese multinational Huawei, our group raised concerns about privacy and state security. We also made the condition that there would be no danger to human and animal health. I'd like to say a few words about that. For the long-term effects, we must await epidemiological and, where possible, oncological studies in relation to the PVV. That should actually happen. I know that terrible animal experiments have been carried out in the past at 3G and 4G. I strongly oppose that. For example, they're going to tie a monkey's phone calls to his head, while a monkey isn't representative of man at all. So it turns out. That is why we are going to stop animal testing in the Netherlands and reduce it as much as possible. We go as far as possible to animal testing-free innovations, where I myself am the great director behind. Because animals are not representative at all. So let's be very clear that I'm not asking for animal experiments. No animal testing, because it must all be representative of man. No tests on defenseless animals, which are not representative. As long as harmful effects on humans and animals cannot be demonstrated, the PVV could agree to roll-out. Mr Bromet also said that 16.6 million was spent on investigations into electromagnetic fields. Can 5G cause increased or wrong cell division? And if not, what's the difference with 3G and 4G? We do not want any health risks to be taken at all. There must be no health effects. Now the Secretary of State wrote in a letter we received that the Health Council has also established that as long as you remain below established standards, there are no health effects. And Professor Hans Kromhout of Utrecht University is investigating the long-term effects of mobile radiation on humans. At the moment, he cannot guarantee that the radiation from mobile telephony is dangerous, nor can he guarantee that it is safe. Kromhout advises to do more research. That is why I am holding a motion and will support various motions by my colleague from the CDA. We really want those health effects to be investigated. And that money certainly also for the oncological effects, if possible and necessary. According to Professor Kromhout, the roll-out of 5G does not need to be stopped. I also like to get a reaction to that. Let's make it clear that Huawei is a no-go. That is simply not going to happen, and we are happy to get a commitment on that. I hope, moreover, that there is a majority in the Chamber for that too, because only you are so lonely and you can start so little. I therefore hope that several parties will support this, because state security must never be at stake. Never! And it has already been said that vital parts must be protected. Fixed and mobile networks must be protected. It is quite possible that vital parts can be hit in their hearts instantly. That must never happen. In addition, people's privacy must be guaranteed. Madam President, I await the answer. So I'd like to get the commitment as far as Huawei is concerned. Then I may not have to make a motion on that. And I also like to be promised that these tests will be carried out outside of animal testing. It is therefore epidemiological and oncological research. Thank you."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-09-03-tweedekamer-3.u10", "speech text": "The last answer I didn't find so terribly clear. Was it also on behalf of Minister Koolmees and Minister De Jonge or was it the personal title? But more importantly, the minister says you have to be honest in politics. I agree with him. So if you choose one, you can't do the other. So if you choose defense and charge relief as a priority, you can't spend a lot of money on other things. Then I ask the Minister to also clarify to the people he wants to cut back on. Does that mean that your own risk or your own contributions to care go up? Does that mean, like Dijkhoff, that the welfare is going down? Does that mean I wouldn't advise the Minister, because CDA leaders have preceded him in the past and that the AOW will be reduced? What does that mean, then, what did the Finance Minister say yesterday? He can't stay away from making clear to people he's pleading for, because it can't be both. And \"less\" doesn't fall for that, because we all know that we're all getting older, that we're getting older, that care costs are going up, and that means that you can't keep the same level with the same money. The Minister of Finance knows that better than anyone. So if he wants to do something, he should also mention measures and give clarity here to the people in plain language."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-09-10-tweedekamer-26.u4", "speech text": "Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Tomorrow it will be exactly a year since this debate was requested, but it is good to talk in plenary today about digitisation. Because, of course, the digital world has not stood still since the Council of State gave its opinion. Yesterday, a report from the WRR was published to address the vulnerability of our digital defense. I have a direct question to the Secretary of State: when can we expect a cabinet response to that report? The State Committee on Parliamentary System, which we will soon be discussing extensively in this Chamber, has also made recommendations in the area of digitisation. And right now, there's a temporary chamber committee working to look at the digital future, and how we can get a better grip on this as a parliament. However, today's debate deals specifically with the unsolicited opinion of the Council of State. This opinion raises a number of important legal concerns and suggests to the Council of State how these concerns can be addressed. GroenLinks shares those concerns of the Council of State. The Council of State rightly calls for attention to be paid to the position of citizens. The position of citizens is too often underestimated by the government, and speed and costs are taken too quickly as the main guiding principle for policy. Mr. Chairman. An important concern is digital decision-making based on algorithms. Because of this automated form of decision-making, there is no longer any need for decision-making. This may sound efficient and saves costs, but the circumstances of the case and/or the situation, an important criterion for GroenLinks, are hardly or insufficiently taken into account in this decision-making process. There is also a risk of undesirable effects, such as discrimination. With regard to GroenLinks, the use of algorithms must always be verifiable as to how a particular decision was made. How are things now, so I ask the Secretary of State, with monitoring the use of algorithms by the government? At the end of May, a study by the NOS revealed that governments use large-scale predictive algorithms. As a result of these results, the Dutch Data Protection Authority has called on the government to be much more transparent about the application of algorithms. In the cabinet response, the Secretary of State refers several times to the GDPR and the Code Good Digital Board. How's this code coming? And do the existing rules provide sufficient protection against unwanted use of algorithms? Because even though algorithms don't lead to direct decisions, they can be very controlling. Often people do not know that algorithms are being used, and certainly not how they can defend themselves against wrong use. I'd like a response from the Secretary of State. Mr. Chairman. Then there is an important concern for GroenLinks, namely how to ensure that everyone, including those who are less or not able to make use of the digital service, can always continue to participate in society. We have nearly 2.5 million low-lettered people in our country. These people must also be able to communicate with the government. I know that the Secretary of State is using the line that contact via the post or a counter should always be possible. I'm very happy about that. In addition, it is of course good to support anyone who is unable to do so in digital participation. For a large group of people it is becoming increasingly difficult to participate and communicate fully with the government. There is a real need to invest in opportunities for these people. For example, contact points in neighbourhoods, where people can get help with digital contact with the government. As far as GroenLinks is concerned, the public must always be at the forefront of services. And the development and improvement of services must always be driven from the citizen's perspective. How can citizens be helped as adequately and inclusively as possible? Too often, unfortunately, we still see too much being driven from the government's perspective. What is the state of implementation of the recommendations in this area? Mr. Chairman. In its opinion, the Council of State states that legislation on digital development is now often made too ad hoc. The Council of State also sees a tension between, on the one hand, technical independent legislation and, on the other, legal certainty and the primacy of the legislator. That's a tricky field of tension. Nevertheless, we must guarantee the quality of legislation and legal certainty from our constitutional point of view. I would like to ask the Secretary of State how the legislator can ensure that the principles of state law are properly safeguarded. I'd like a response from the Secretary of State to that. Thank you, Mr. Chairman."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-09-11-tweedekamer-10.u18", "speech text": "Depends on the ship. If it's a supply ship, it's got a whole different bet than when the ship's in defense or as an attack ship. Then it's just part of a fleet. So if your question is whether the supply ships are equipped with all sensors and all weapons by default, the answer is no. It depends on the function of the ship. They are protected by the frigates that sail along and for which they supply."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-09-18-tweedekamer-2.u3", "speech text": "Mr. Chairman. I want and I will spend my speaking time today to a large extent in a different way from other years. Last week, the coalition parties VVD, CDA, D66 and ChristenUnion, together with the group of DENK, made it impossible for me to speak here in this house, actually the house of democracy, even before the forthcoming verdict in the political trial against me. First a verdict and then a debate: apparently they had agreed with each other. Above all, the bottom stone must not emerge now and no conclusions must yet be drawn for the verdict. 'Cause that might help me. And that, Mr. Chairman, is false to me. But I'll talk about that political persecution. Nobody's gonna shut me up about that. And I will do that today. Here. Live. On television. In the house of democracy. About the hatred of those justice officials against me and about their direct involvement in my trial, about the decline of our rule of law, about the madness of the state-facilitated claims against me and about all the energy that takes years of misery. Mr. Chairman. In a few weeks it is exactly fifteen years since I lost my own freedom, that I had to leave my house in beautiful Venlo and was taken with my wife to a barracks on the Dutch-Belgian border and later to a prison in Zeist to be safe. There were no safehouses at the time. I've never been home since. In those 15 years I have never been alone on the street and I have never emptied my own mailbox again. Privacy has since become an abstract concept for me, because my agenda, both business and private, goes to the DKDB every day and every week to the intelligence service, the AIVD. I say this because over the past 15 years I have learned that freedom, the most precious possession of a human being, is never self-evident, that every day you have it, you have to enjoy it, that you always have to fight for it and cherish it every second. Some things can't be valued until you don't have them anymore. And I crave my freedom every day. I lost my own because I criticize Islam and because I am convinced that my political belief is that Islam is a threat to our freedom. But I could never have said that it wasn't just Al-Qaeda and the Taliban, ISIS and other idiots, but of course it was also a very different way, but still parts of the Dutch government are doing everything they can to fight me in their own way, because they hate me, and they're patching the trias politician to their boots to get at me. In the first process I've experienced, the so-called Wilders I process, after the release of my short anti-Koran film Fitna in 2008, it already started. Back then, CDA Justice Minister Hirsch Ballin actually wanted to give a political lead to the Public Prosecutor's Office to prosecute me, but another way was found. His party colleague, the councillor of the Amsterdam Court of Justice, Tom Schalken, was used to prosecute me by means of a so-called Article 12 procedure. And I did. The CDA judge Schalken even went so far that he tried to influence my late friend and colleague Hans Jansen at dinner shortly before his trial in court. Shameless. But luckily that all came true. The court was avenged. The CDA judge Schalken resigned and I was finally cleared of all charges. But it was, of course, mafia practice. Then the Wilders II process followed, after my \"more or less\" question at a political meeting of the PVV in 2014 in The Hague. I don't care what you think of that statement. Anyone can have their opinion on that. By the way, 41% of the Dutch agreed. But apart from what you think, what happened then is hard to comprehend. There were parades, with mayors first. Like in Nijmegen, where CDA mayor Bruls bought the givers coffee and tea, while the summoned band played a cheerful music. There were thick piles of pre-printed declaration forms all over the place. The police went to mosques to help fill out the forms. The police also said that she didn't like Wilders' statements. Counselors of the Labour Party did translations in the mosque. Imams put pressure on mosque visitors, people who often didn't know what it was about at all, to sign these declaration forms. We know this from witness interviews. Mr. Chairman. But it got a lot crazier. In the meantime, we also know that the Public Prosecutor's Office itself at least had serious doubts as to whether it should prosecute me. It didn't even want to prosecute a few statements. And yet there was a trial, with a very bad role of the Ministry of Justice of then VVD Minister Opstelten. A witness even heard Opstelten say 'I quote that witness, I was not there myself, but I quote that witness 'that I was in front of them'. Madam President. The officials of that VVD Minister Opstelten then interfered extensively with my criminal proceedings. They called me evil. Imagine: an official of justice calls a parliamentarians evil! I thought that only in dictatorships opposition leaders are seen as a form of cancer that should be eradicated. But then they helped the state's attorney's office with the defense again. They gave legal arguments to maximise the likelihood of a conviction. They adapted press releases. They wanted to get the petition from the D.A.'s office in advance so they could read along, give tips to the state's attorney's office. There were attorney generals and prosecutors who made police reports, as we now know, in which there were obituaries. And witnesses such as the same Minister Opstelden but also top officials, members during their interrogation to the council commissioner at the court suddenly collectively of amnesia. On nine out of ten questions, they said they couldn't remember. And Minister Grapperhaus, who is not here today for understandable reasons, deliberately informed the Chamber two weeks ago incompletely and misplaced the Chamber. Mr. Chairman. With all this interference from the Ministry of Justice, the rule of law has been violated, but the coalition does not want to debate it until the judge has sentenced it and I may therefore hope not, but it may have been condemned. I really don't have any words for it. The members of the government's groups should be deeply ashamed of themselves. If the rule of law is at stake in Hungary or Poland, then it is shameful. We will then be demanding heavy sanctions, and we would prefer to have an urgent debate on the same day. But if it happens in front of their own eyes here in their own country with a colleague of the opposition in their own parliament, then unfresh cases are at once under the courts, then everything has to be covered up for a while until the verdict has been passed."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-09-19-tweedekamer-3.u70", "speech text": "Finally. My colleague Mr Stoffer will undoubtedly repeat that question in the General Financial Reviews and then I will rely on a well prepared answer, so it will be fine. But just another thought experiment. I already mentioned the DOD. There we are certainly not just rushing towards 2%. Luckily, there's money coming in. Repairing and modernising, beautiful. But defense spending is going to fall again as a percentage of what we make with each other. We're dangling at the bottom somewhere. How is that budget deficit gonna make any extra money for the Defense Department, which is necessary to move on? What does the perspective look like?"}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-09-19-tweedekamer-3.u245", "speech text": "First of all, the point that Mrs Van Kooten also raised in her first term: the problem of working poor, the people who stack jobs and have very little money. I've already talked about that. I have outlined what we are doing in the framework of the Borstlap Committee, within the framework of a minimum rate forzzp, and what we are doing with the Labour Market Act in balance. That is a whole package of measures. That does not just solve it; I also said that this is a tough problem. So that's what we discussed, but that doesn't solve it. I thought the discussion was now much more about the broad public sector, so the people in the care, education and police and defense. There are broad-based collective agreements. The average of all these wage increases is really in line with whatever happens in the business sectors. So I do not deny that there can be a problem for, as it is called, 'working poor', people with very small wages, who often work part-time or feel more or less forced to rent out as a zzp'er. We talked about that. But I thought Mrs. Marijnissen here was talking about that much broader group of agents, teachers and nurses. That's where I'm seeing wage increases right now. Yes, I would like to see more. It is of course always beautiful if it can be done, but it is not the case that they are lagging behind what is happening in the companies. My party political point was much more the huge discrepancy between the top salaries and the collective bargaining increases in very large companies."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-09-19-tweedekamer-6.u45", "speech text": "Right, I totally agree. I'll mention two other things. Firstly, this is also in the interests of those companies themselves. We know that teams that are diverse perform better than when you put only white guys from the early 40s on a team. Male/woman, different cultural backgrounds, it's just more creative. There's just more going on when you do that. The second is, we need everyone. Today unemployment is rising by a fraction, but I understand from the CBS explanatory statement that this is because more and more people who hear that there is so much cramped in the labour market are now reporting. Then you have a temporary effect of rising unemployment. That is good in itself, given the big cut we have in education, care, defense and police. We need everyone, but also in business. Then I'm like, \"Oh, my God, how incredibly stupid to just keep looking for someone who looks like yourself.\""}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-09-19-tweedekamer-6.u306", "speech text": "Surely the Prime Minister can't be serious... He can't be serious about saying, \"I'm not gonna say anything about it.\" I can only ask my colleagues that. They are my equals, in a constitutional sense. I could ask them to make a request. But you are standing here, at least on behalf of the government, on behalf of your predecessors, on behalf of the cabinet and therefore also on behalf of the former Minister of Justice. I could ask you for an answer. I said yesterday that it was proven that many MPs and also many people outside this Chamber - at least on behalf of officials from the Ministry of Justice were interrogated at the Public Prosecutor's Office. I'm not even talking about politics. They sent defenses to the D.A.'s office. They helped with the legal foundation, in the vein of, \"Then we're gonna fix that\" you have to use. They've had the wish to request the requisition. You can't be serious, can you? Then you throw me again in front of the wolves of that court, the court, I have to say who might then condemn me. I hope not, of course, but it's possible. Afterwards, if you're here in the Chamber, it turns out you might agree with me. Once again, I am already sorry about my colleagues, but I can really ask you for an answer and a ruling on what you think of that."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-09-19-tweedekamer-6.u421", "speech text": "Mr. Chairman. Finally, the process. I really do not think it is worth describing that the Prime Minister, in line with the coalition, responds to my request by saying: no, look at it Wilders; I am not going to comment on the facts. He said it a little more politely, but that's the bottom line. At this stage, I will never ask the Prime Minister to speculate. I can't understand that, but I'm asking him to speak out about the facts, and those facts are public. Once again, those facts were sent to the Chamber by Minister Grapperhaus. Those are the facts of the WOB procedure or the facts of which the Court has ordered disclosure. Mr. Chairman. These are facts that not only point to it, but also show very clearly that the officials of the Ministry of Justice have intervened in my trial under the ministerial responsibility of former Minister of State of State of the Interior. Those facts are proof of that. It's not an interpretation! Those officials threw the trias politician out the window. They have influenced the process, and that, of course, requires a ruling from the Prime Minister. What have these civil servants done? Let me say this briefly, also for the Chamber and for my motion which I am about to table. Those prosecutors helped the D.A. come up with and rebut the possible defense defense defense defense. And that involved concrete legal questions such as: can Wilders call for participation in the social debate? Has there been any mention of nationality? Shouldn't we bet on race anymore? Very specific legal questions have been passed on to the prosecution by the Ministers of Justice. They've also given legal ammunition to the D.A. to make a successful conviction of me. It's literally there to make it more likely. I am not talking about Russia or North Korea. For example, the final sentence of what I said then: then we will settle it. It has literally been said to the prosecution: tell them that that might be a very good angle to use in the prosecution of Wilders. And then one official e-mailed to another: okay, I'll pass it on to the state's attorney's office. Mr. Chairman. Those are facts. You can see that. It's on paper. It's not an opinion. It's nothing in my head. They're hard facts! The officials also wanted to read the petition from the Public Prosecutor's Office and make useful comments. Officials also rewritten the press release, which took out the names of colleagues Samsom and Spekman, former colleagues of the Labour Party. That wasn't a good time. Don't do that. The Minister approved that out. That's not a decision of the D.A.'s office, because that's what the D.A. did. Mr. Chairman. Again, it can't stand the light of day. If we did what the Prime Minister said, if we waited until after the trial and for the verdict and if we said, \"Well, we don't harm the trias politician now,\" you'd put me to the wall with your back. Then you say: \"It's okay if the trias politician gets trampled on in the beginning, but we're not gonna fix it. We're not even gonna talk about that. Go hang first and we'll see what happens.\" Mr President, that is false! That is falseness of the highest order and that is why I shall now table a motion. Because I can't accept that. I would like to say the following to my fellow Members. At the request of colleagues, I did not wish to interrupt the debate by making an order proposal and asking for a roll-call vote. So I'm doing that now with a motion. But I'll tell you this. Even if this motion is not adopted, with which the government may be entitled not to implement it under state law, because it has not been adopted, even if the government does not carry out that rejected motion, which is normal in this country, but I shall still ask the question of confidence. Anyway. If the motion is adopted and the Minister refuses to implement it, I will ask the question of confidence. But if the motion is not adopted and the Minister insists on not answering it, I will also ask the question of confidence. Hence the next motion."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-09-25-tweedekamer-3.u43", "speech text": "Mr. Chairman. The speaker of the PVV, Mr Kops, just started the attacks. Those are moments of course that are burned on the retina with all of us. Reference was also made to France. I have some friends and family who live in France. When you hear how the fear still concerns some people, when they haven't even been there, then I understand very well the quest of these proposers for opportunities to cut off people who are really evil towards us. I think we all share that search; Mr Van Dam referred to it as well. Definitely the VVD also supports the search for opportunities to cut off the bad guys. Mr. Chairman. Having said that, I would like to begin by congratulating the authors and congratulating them on their important work. To defend an initiative law here is a memorable moment, a parliamentary highlight. Then to the content. I have found that the proposers have clearly sought the limits of the legally feasible, so dare and courage cannot be denied. They are convinced that all existing instruments seem to be inadequate. Everyone wants, and can also expect, that the government will do what is necessary to protect the Netherlands from terrorists who want to violate our rule of law. \"Wanting to abuse the rule of law\" is in itself also a wording that we need to take into account. The members propose that the Dutch be given the power to jail for up to six months via the government, without the need for a judge. Moreover, detention may be extended for the same duration each time, infinitely. The number of times the measure under this proposal can be extended is therefore not limited. We've taken a good look at the proposal. Have the initiators taken into account that their proposal does something that also targets terrorists? Indeed, it renders important foundations of our Dutch rule of law inoperative. This will make it possible for the government to hold you as a Dutchman for six months without a proper and fair criminal trial, without defense, without any possibility of appeal, without any foreseeable criminal offence by law and without protection against abuse of justice and arbitrariness. These are all the foundations of the rule of law. Moreover, in theory detention can be infinite, because the measure can be extended an infinite number of times; that is not maximized. I'd like a response from the proposers to this concern. The principle of criminal legality means that people know clearly in advance what behaviour is punishable, so that they can adapt their behaviour accordingly. This principle is the cornerstone of criminal law in a functioning rule of law. This proposal removes this cornerstone. If the government, under the guise of guarding the security of the Dutch people, can lock up outside the court without criminal proceedings, this raises the question of who is guarding the guards. In addition, there is a second reason why this proposal may not combat terrorism, but serves precisely. In fact, judges are bound by the ne-bis-in-idem principle, the principle of law that a person cannot be prosecuted twice for the same fact. On the basis of this proposal, a person may be locked up for, in principle, six months on the basis of undefined conduct which may be associated with possible terrorist activities. That's nine and a half years shorter than the prison sentence that's possible when the same person comes to court for conspiracy or preparation of an attack. However, if that person has previously been punished administratively, a judge must take account of these circumstances of the case, which means that that person can either not be prosecuted at all, or gets away with a lower prison sentence. How do the proposers see this risk of lower and milder penalties thanks to their proposal? Or is their confidence in justice so great that they think that this will be easy and that judges will still dare to give the full pound of punishment, even if an administrative penalty has been imposed before? This proposal must, if I understand it correctly, be an anti-terrorism law, but it must not be limited to terrorism. Why not? Making it possible to prosecute a potentially dangerous person, a person who could pose a potential threat, is not defined in this proposal. Why not? There are also no concrete grounds for imposing a measure of freedom-absorbedness. I ask the authors why they are not present. It is unclear for the VVD to whom and for what facts or behaviour detention can be imposed, if I look at the text of the law itself. Can the proposers clarify this? I look forward to the answer."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-10-01-tweedekamer-28.u14", "speech text": "Mr. Chairman. The PVV supports the decision of the D.A. to prosecute three Russians and one Ukrainian. The criminal trial is getting closer to that. But a happy outcome, I fear, one that does justice to the murder of 196 compatriots, is getting further out of the picture. Russia is hardly cooperating, the anti-Semitic Prime Minister of Malaysia continues to cast doubt and Ukraine has now also failed to do so. As part of that prisoner exchange, Ukraine would have handed over an MH17 crown witness to Russia. Later, in a letter to Ukraine, the prosecution even talked about the extradition of a suspect. Can the Minister of Security and Justice confirm that this Tsemach was already a suspect at the time? Was and is Tsemach, the man I'm talking about who led an air defense brigade in eastern Ukraine, indeed suspect? What does the transfer of Tsemach to Russia mean for the relationship with Ukraine inside and outside the JIT? Can Ukraine still be trusted, now that it has turned out to have used a key witness or suspect as a means of exchange in 297 homicide cases in a transaction with Russia? I'd like a response. Mr. Chairman. 9 March next year, the MH17 trial will start, without suspects in the benches, without a key witness and without unconditional political support from initial allies. It is therefore beginning to look more and more like the case is slipping through the hands of this cabinet. And I must say that it also seems that the cabinet owes it to itself. Because nothing shows that the cabinet has taken everything out of the closet to prevent the transfer of Tsemach to Russia. The fact that this Tsemach is worth gold is demonstrated by the fact that Russia saw him as a crucial part of the exchange. Without Tsemach there would be no exchange at all, the Russian demand was. And yet our rulers were invisible and silent in the weeks preceding that exchange, even though they had knowledge that Tsemach should be involved in that exchange. Silent diplomacy seems to have failed. And I'm sure Tsemach wouldn't have been so stupid to give just before his extradition just as full openness to a rushed employee of the Dutch state's attorney's office, would he? I'd like a response from the rulers. Mr. Chairman. Where Russia and Ukraine have understoodably thought about their own interests with the exchange of prisoners, the PVV concludes that this cabinet has harmed its own interests. Why didn't the Netherlands play the case extremely high in August and look for support from other JIT countries, to prevent the exchange of Tsemach, and publicly threatened with counter-measures? I would like a reaction, because I still find that incomprehensible. Mr. Chairman. The PVV has previously indicated that for the full truth finding not only the cooperation of Russia but also that of Ukraine is indispensable. Now that both countries do not, or at least do not, fully cooperate, it is seriously damaging the truth. A call by the King at the UN for full cooperation cannot repair that damage. And why didn't the king alongside Russia also call for Ukraine to cooperate fully? I would also like to receive a response from the Foreign Minister. UN Resolution 2166 instructs countries to fully cooperate in criminal investigations. Ukraine has lapped that resolution through the exchange of Tsemach. Or do the ministers disagree with me? Finally, I would like to ask the Foreign Minister whether the talks with Russia on state liability are still ongoing. Is that gonna go well? Or is that actually dead in front of the closet? Thank you very much, Mr President."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-10-02-tweedekamer-6.u27", "speech text": "When we were in the outgoing cabinet, D66 and other parties said shame that we then said that we needed more money for education in that budget too. We've been committed to that for years. In the previous period, I have benefited greatly from the efforts of D66 as an opposition party to regulate more money for education. I would say: take this hand-off from the opposition, from the PvdA, to get those cuts off the table. You also say about the cuts: they are the budgetary rules, but it also hurts me. The cabinet does pay extra money for defense and other matters. Then at least get those cuts off the table. Because the relationship with the universities has fallen to a low point, and that under the responsibility of a minister of D66-house. Couldn't we work together to at least get these cuts off the table that they can't do anything about?"}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-10-03-tweedekamer-5.u58", "speech text": "In this discussion, I'm missing a variant. The Ministry estimates healthcare expenditure and then it has been falling down for a few years in a row. The VVD says: it can go back to the people. The cabinet lowers the ceiling and raises the ceiling at Defense. So you can also put it in defense equipment. What is also possible is that the money will go back to health care in the years to come. For example, you can do something about the vacancies and the staff shortage. The salaries can be raised. You can invest in health care again. And I haven't heard that variant so far. If we're going to do research, I want this variant to be included."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-10-09-tweedekamer-4.u38", "speech text": "I don't want to think about hugging some people, but with Barry, I'd love to do it. Madam President. The most important part for me is, of course, animal welfare. I once went into the Chamber for that, to be a representative of the people, or 'animal representative', I actually have to call it. From the Wilders Group, in 2005, 2006 we asked for the fundamental rights of animals to be enshrined in the Constitution. We did that together with GroenLinks, but GroenLinks is currently blocking my own initiative law. I can't do anything right now, because the initiative law has been put in place by GroenLinks. I have it ready too, but Bureau Legislation does not allow me because GroenLinks has been freezing it for so many years. Maybe the Minister could take action? How can the Minister guarantee the rights of animals in the Constitution? That is very essential for us. We started that once as Group Wilders. I'm a first-hour boy, and so is Barry. Afterwards, of course, it became the Party for Freedom, but by the way, it should always have been the Wilders Group. But that's not the case. I call on GroenLinks to release that law, because we would like to submit it. Basically, we can't do anything right now. Why has he been blocked for so many years, over ten years? I'll probably hear about that later. The current Animal Law recognises the intrinsic value of the animal and assures some needs, but with the growing number of serious ill-treatments and the undersized, laughable community punishments, which are truly scandalous......................................................................................................................................................................................................... So it's necessary. Madam President. Soon, during a general consultation, an AO Animal Welfare, two petitions will be presented to the Minister by Mrs Gerda van den Wijngaert and Mr Michiel Mulder. That's two civilians. I don't know how many tens of thousands of signatures I've collected, because everyone's sick of it: if you tie a dog to a tree somewhere in the middle of the summer and let him starve to death and drown, you'll just get a community service of 100 hours or 50 parole. Those people are going to jail! They must be put in jail, on water and bread, and be banned from keeping animals for a lifetime. That's how animal executioners should be dealt with. I won't die until I do, though I'll have to become a minister or secretary of state myself someday. But that's a pretty small chance, so I'm gonna leave it to this minister, our deputy prime minister. Animalia does not need to have the same rights as homo sapiens, human beings, but once we deprive animals of their freedom, they are entitled to an animal-worthy life. Babies and other commercially incompetent people without awareness and even criminals have rights. Even criminals! Why don't animals have them? They have never harmed a fly and are all born healthy and well, without evil in them. Because all animals are born good and sweet. Why don't animals have rights? Minister, please give me an answer, and please take action. I trust it, also as a shepherd of your sheep, because this is the Minister of Animal Welfare and the Deputy Prime Minister of our country, and also a religious man. Whether you believe in evolution or in the creation story: animals were there before humans, whatever you believe in. As with the latter, the trade-incompetent people, this can be exercised, for example, by having those rights by legally competent representatives. On 17 May 2002, the Bundestag decided to include animal protection in the Constitution with a two-thirds majority in Germany. The Germans! We're behind on everything. Minister Weiss is also passing us on all sides. Even in Bulgaria. In Bulgaria I myself was allowed to be present at the introduction of the full-time animal police. And what are we doing here? We have a full-time animal police. It's one big success. But no, he's a brainchild from the PVV and so we're gonna turn it into parttimers and preferably we're gonna kill them. Party politics on the back of defenseless animals. It's just outrageous. And that while the animal police, according to a former chief of police, is one of the most successful units, you shouldn't say that anymore, but let me call it that among the national police. Those teams are so successful. They do a lot of things about undermining crime. When you invade an animal executioner, you also encounter arms trafficking and trafficking in human beings, trafficking in money and dogs, and dog fights. They're just assholes, and they just need to be dealt with. And that's what you do by protecting animals. Are you all right, Madam President?"}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-10-15-tweedekamer-15.u26", "speech text": "Mr. Chairman. The veterans are entitled to an answer soon. We support the letter. As far as I am concerned, this letter is for the debate on the defence budget, because that debate is in the week of 4 November. Then it could be taken with the defense budget. If we still have to have a separate debate, then we can look at it. So now no support."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-10-16-tweedekamer-11.u4", "speech text": "Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It's a good thing we're talking to each other again in the short term, but the reason is, of course, terrible. The Kurdish politician Hervin Khalaf was dragged out of her car and murdered by Islamic militias who, together with the Turkish groups, are fighting the Syrian Democratic Forces in northern Syria. Her death may be the most obvious atrocity we have seen so far from the Turkish attack, but there are many more victims, at least dozens, possibly hundreds. Moreover, another 160,000 people have been displaced. UNICEF estimates there are about 70,000 of them children. Mr. Chairman. These are the consequences of the irresponsible and unjust action of NATO member Turkey. Irresponsible, given the great humanitarian suffering caused by it. It is also irresponsible because the main ally in the fight against ISIS is being attacked, which actually stops the fight against ISIS and already manages to escape prisoners. One irresponsible and unjust because there is no attack on Turkey from Northern Syria by the SDF or even by the YPG. So there is no question of self-defense. This is therefore a serious violation of international law. Another result of the Turkish attack is that the SDF know themselves betrayed by the West and then turn to Assad out of despair. Mr. Chairman. I come to the following questions. What if Turkey and Syria are about to face each other directly? What if Syria attacks the Turks? Are we then obliged, I ask the cabinet, to help Turkey as a NATO ally? Article 5 points out that. We shouldn't end up in a situation like this. I'd like a response from the Prime Minister and the Prime Minister. I'm considering a motion on that point. Mr. Chairman. It is good that arms supplies from the European Union to Turkey are actually stopped, but the question is, of course, the following: we could not get that out of the EU-RBZ Council statement. Everyone's in now? And what are they doing, a full arms embargo on Turkey or a partial embargo on only those weapons that can be used against Syria? Let us be clear on that point. There should actually be an arms embargo as wide as possible in the EU. Does the Minister agree with me that it should go that way? Mr. Chairman. At least 160,000 people have already drifted; I already mentioned it. These people need help immediately, in the area itself, but when they cross the border, they also need help in Iraq. Is the Minister prepared to lend the help? Is the cabinet prepared to make funds available for this? Mr. Chairman. Turkey plays an ambiguous role in relation to ISIS. We know the AIVD report that says Turkey has given ISIS the opportunity to regroup. Now the Turks are effectively putting an end to the fight against ISIS. In fact, captured ISIS fighters are now on the loose and are once again a threat. That is why the following questions to the cabinet. What will the cabinet do with the EU to prevent the captured ISIS fighters from being released and returning to battle or travelling uncontrolledly to Europe, and thus to the Netherlands? What happens if the camps of ISIS fighters come under Turkey's control and are then handed them over to the Netherlands? Hundreds of women have already broken out, with their children. The Minister states in his letter that these are not Dutch mothers. Where are the Dutch mothers? What are the chances of uncontrolled release? What answers does the cabinet now have to this new situation? Mr. Chairman. Let me be clear: the Christian Union is and remains in favour of the local trial of those ISIS fighters, preferably through a tribunal, without the death penalty. They have committed the crimes there and must also be tried there. Finally. Does the government now know whether goods supplied by the Netherlands, such as pick-up trucks, are being used by the so-called moderate militias fighting with the Turkish side in the fight against the Kurds? If not, can the cabinet figure this out? For it would be very harsh and very acidic in the direction of the Kurds if we had provided material, although not weapons, but material that could be used against the most loyal and effective ally in the fight against ISIS. I'd like to hear a response from the cabinet. Thank you, Mr. Chairman."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-10-16-tweedekamer-11.u85", "speech text": "Thank you, Mr President. War is horrible and war is propaganda. Operation Rainbow, Operation Olive branch, Operation Summer Rain and now Operation Peacelord. This week, Cartoonist Bas van der Schot made it painfully clear which cynical names are chosen for wars that make defenseless people play ball of geopolitical interests. Naming as gold for the political interests of Erdogan, Trump, Putin and Assad, and of the Dutch arms industry. If we want it to stop, we have to start with our own part in this misery. Minister Blok informed this Chamber that arms exports to Turkey, where there is a risk of arms being used in the battle in Northern Syria, were rejected. According to the Minister, arms supplies to Turkey are de facto suspended. The Animal Party wants no more weapons to go to Turkey. Can the Prime Minister guarantee that no European and Dutch weapons will go to Turkey? That's question one. The VVD thought we shouldn't risk the Turkish holidays. Later the VVD mentioned that as a bad example. Let's get out of here. It happens. Let us agree that the fate of 4 million displaced Syrians must be at the forefront and the fate of the Kurds, who have now chosen between two fires for the least of the two evils only to save the environment, and that of the people who have been driven out of their homes in the run-up to a winter that can also be very barren in Turkey and Syria. Let us agree that this must be the priority. Mr. Chairman. A NATO ally who does what Erdogan does is not an ally but a danger to peace and security. Europe has given ally Erdogan the ultimate blackmail weapon: the Turkey deal as a shield against European criticism of the invasion of Northeast Syria. The Animal Party was against the law that made staying in terrorist territory a criminal offence. Through this law, Dutch aid workers and journalists must first seek permission from the Ministry of Justice and Security and this is the most important work: independent news gathering as a counterweight to war propaganda and independent aid as a counterweight to war violence. NGOs, journalists and the Council of State have destructive criticism of this law, which is still being continued. Can the Prime Minister reflect on this in the light of the current circumstances, in which defenceless people are held hostage by superpowers? Is the Cabinet prepared to re-examine and reconsider that law? I'd like a response. We cannot leave the children of IS fighters who live in terrible conditions to their fate. There are parties in this house who want to condemn these children in absentia for the choice their parents made. Dutch children are entitled to stay in the Netherlands, regardless of who their parents are and what their parents' choice has been. The rights of children must be guaranteed. Does the Prime Minister agree with the Animal Party and is he prepared to act accordingly? We too are concerned about the IS fighters who can return massively. The Animal Party wants these warriors to be tried. What are the options for this? Mr. Chairman. Violence almost never solves anything and often leads to new violence and new escalation. Can the Prime Minister give us an insight into how he invests in de-escalation and what humanitarian aid he envisages for the Kurds and Syrian refugees in particular? Thank you."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-10-17-tweedekamer-10.u140", "speech text": "Yes, Mr. Chairman, let me move on quickly. Our ears still hurt from all those retarded sustainability plans we've heard from the rulers. The whole of the Netherlands is turning into one major traffic infarct, but this minister writes a competition for CO-neutral asphalt. As far as we're concerned, that's crazy. Asphalt must be sustainable because it has to last a long time and not because it is made of hippie materials and bins with money costs. It is also too sad for words that this VVD minister continues to hit motorists hard by lowering the speeds on our motorways. The PVV is fiercely opposed to this government defense, which is why I'm filing the next motion. [[Motion]] [[The Chamber,]] [[heard the debate,]] [[noting that:]] [[the promotion of traffic flow on motorways by increasing the maximum speed;]] [[a maximum speed of 140 kilometres per hour allows drivers to operate a variable speed in order to promote flow;]] [[calls on the government to increase the speed limit on motorways to 140 kilometres per hour,]] [[and goes to the order of the day.]] [[This motion has been proposed by Mr Van Aalst. It seems to me that their submission is sufficiently supported.]] [[She's getting No. kst-35300-XII-17]]"}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-10-29-eerstekamer-6.u209", "speech text": "Mr. Chairman. If one thing has become clear in these General Reviews, it is precisely that the content and strength of the argument still prevail here. That started with the contribution of the first speaker, Mr Cliteur, and that has continued. We will have to do our best in this respect. My conclusion after the first term of the Chamber is also that, if we want to get something done here, we need to motivate it well and that is not a race that has run in advance. The eulogy, by the way, was very positive, was said here and there, and \"the Netherlands is doing so well.\" Yes, that is true on many points, but that speech also contained a profit warning, namely: where we stand well, we must also be alert. This applies to economic growth, which we are currently seeing flattened under the influence of international developments. But that also applies to public services and even to our pension system. We shall, of course, be discussing this again this evening. Another profit warning, which was also very clearly present in the speech of the throne, was about the fact that during the journey all kinds of problems can arise, with which you have to deal politically and where you have to remove bottlenecks. That's where we're in the middle of it, too. Nitrogen and pfas are of course the most visible subjects. I shall come back to that again on the basis of the various questions. Perhaps I could say to Mrs Vos that what she said about racism and discrimination has been taken from my heart and that I agree with her that we, as politicians, have the task of standards. That can happen in a debate if something is said about a woman in that debate, but that certainly also applies when it comes to this issue. What always annoys me is that I understand that, when large groups of people have come from outside the Netherlands to the Netherlands, that requires a country as a whole to deal with it. But if you don't give someone an internship because her name is Fatima, or you don't hire someone because his name is Muhammad, or you reject people's skin color, that's so fucking stupid. Apart from the fact that it's stupid, you're also doing yourself very short, because it doesn't lead to the good mix of people, man-woman, white-black, gay-hetero, which ultimately leads to better decisions. If you don't think so, you'll be stuck with all the clubs of white Dutch men from the early 40s and we now know where that takes us. For that reason it's unbelievable... Well, Mrs Van Engelshoven is sitting here and Mr Grapperhaus is older, but I would like to say this in my reply. But I take up the point that there is also a normative role for politics. The first issue I would like to address is economics and taxation. Furthermore, I come to purchasing power and burden development as a second block. The third is labour market, social security. Four, environment, climate. Five, safety. Six, international and defense. Seven, domestic government. Eight, take care. And nine, education. But I'll always tell you exactly what theme we're in. The first theme is therefore economics and taxation. There were quite a few questions about that. That also makes sense, because that subject belongs to the General Reviews. One of the first questions that has come back several times is: is there still cause for optimism? Isn't there a risk that expectations will have to be adjusted? I heard Mr Van Rooijen but also others about this. Very briefly, we must base ourselves on the estimates as they are. We know him. That is that the economy is growing by 1.8% this year and by 1.5% next year. We'll have to see if it stays that way. By the way, we are one of the fastest growing economies in this part of Europe, but this is also part of a country that is highly export driven and often comes out of the crisis a little slower and therefore continues to grow a little longer. So that in itself is not a very special one. What you do see is that the Dutch economy has been significantly diversified in recent years. For example, our dependence on the German economy, which was still very large ten years ago, has decreased and we have more of our own independent economic space. It is still strongly linked to Germany because of its exports and all other contacts, but economically speaking we are somewhat less dependent. When Germany sneezes, not all of the Netherlands has a cold. That's gotten less. Of course, we rely on the estimates of the Central Planning Bureau. That's all we've got. They're good. They can do that well, but, as has already been said in my introductory word and in the Throne speech, there are economic risks. I mentioned a few and add the Brexit to that. Then there was a question about the ESC opinion entitled Diversity in the summit. All advice from the ESC weighs heavily, but of course we are also looking for support for these measures. We are considering it right now. Before Christmas, we come up with a cabinet position. So I can't anticipate that right now, because then I'm going to tell you what I think. But then maybe I'll have another fight with flanks in this coalition. With four parties, I've learned, it's wise to say something when we agree. Then there was the question from the angle of D66 and CDA: how do you look at the long-term absence of interest? What does it actually mean for a society if you have low interest rates for that long or actually no interest? This is, of course, an important question, because this development has an impact on many policy areas. Wopke Hoekstra and Menno Snel, the rulers, have given a reflection on this Millions note. During the General Financial Reviews in the House of Representatives, we have also been promised to see if we can't explore that subject a little more broadly and in depth, so that's what we're going to do. The Minister will then come with a letter. I'll make sure he goes to the First Chamber, too. Perhaps it is also an opportunity to discuss it separately. But that letter's gonna be here anyway. I'll be right back with the effects on pensions. Specifically about low interest rates, Minister Koolmees van Sociale Zaken, at the request of the Dutch Parliament, has promised to have independent research conducted into long-term low or even negative interest rates on pension savings. He will also be asking the Central Planning Bureau to look into this issue in the near future. That will come back to Parliament in the near future, at least, if you wish, here as well. Then, of course, the question of our economy and our multinationals in particular, on which comments have been made. Mr Rosenm\u00f6ller drew attention to the increase in wages. I also heard Mr Kox on this. I said this very simply. I think that if a very large company in the Netherlands gives the top man 10% or more raise, the staff should get half. Then I've kept it mild, because then we'll limit it to 5%. If the top man gets more than 10%, the staff will still get 5%. That would be my norm. Because I don't understand what those top men do with all that money. It's not even their own company. I don't understand why there should be such crazy high wage increases at the top of these big companies. At the moment we see that the contract wage increase in the Netherlands is slightly below 3%. That's not bad at all, because that's the highest level in ten years. But my comment was about the very large companies. I think they should actually raise between 4% and 5%, given the huge wage increases at the top. I would like to say that these very large companies are extremely important for the Netherlands. They make sure that the fair in Amsterdam is strong again. And because there is a strong stock exchange in Amsterdam, Amsterdam and its surroundings are again the places where other companies want to settle, possibly also to try to manifest themselves in the Netherlands via that stock exchange, at least if they are public limited companies. The fact that we have very large companies like Unilever, Shell, Philips and others in the Netherlands has huge spin-offs. They have brought much to our country and will bring much to our country in the future. They are important, for example for our innovation investments. 40% of all innovation in the Netherlands comes from Philips and former Philips companies such as ASML and NXP. Those are huge percentages. So let us never underestimate how incredibly important these companies are. But that's no reason to be a top man grabbing that you're getting more than 10% raise. By the way, I think 10% is a big deal. Well, that was my comment. I have tried to look for the debate on this, including through Pauw and other programmes, but it has not been possible. I'm going through with it, but that doesn't mean I don't care about those companies. They are of vital importance to the Netherlands. Furthermore, although I do not have to explain this here, we are naturally working to reduce income tax across a very broad front, to bring forward tax relief and to try to make a contribution as a government. Again, overall wage growth is considerable. It's really at the highest level in years. Then there's the investment fund. Later this year, we want to come up with a letter. Mr Wiebes, the Minister for Economic Affairs, will then lead the way in terms of the earning capacity of the Netherlands, i.e. where will the great opportunities lie in the future to further strengthen the earning capacity of the Netherlands. In addition, such a fund is being worked on. Wiebes and Hoekstra, therefore the Ministers for Economic Affairs and Finance, will come forward with further information at the beginning of next year. I can start philosophizing about that now, but I'd rather not do that until there's a cabinet position on it, in line with what I said earlier. We have said something about the type of investment we are talking about. That's also in the Millions Note. You talk about investments with added value compared to private investments. These are not primarily aimed at achieving the best possible financial return. Furthermore, the fund should clearly distinguish itself from existing public funds and funds, such as Invest-NL. These are therefore non-regular and non-structural investments with social added value. Then you can think about knowledge development, innovation and infrastructure. Those are the picket posts we hit. In it, the exceptional earning opportunities for the Netherlands must be developed. At the beginning of next year, financial design will also be further developed. So that's what we'll get back to."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-10-29-eerstekamer-6.u480", "speech text": "NATO is the most powerful military alliance in world history. NATO's umbrella is of paramount importance and America has a crucial contribution, not only from its historical interest, through World War II, but also from a forward defense argument for America itself, to prevent this part of the world from coming under Russian influence. But the answer is and-and, because Mr Knapen outlines developments that I see as well, developments where NATO is not automatically the first approach route to solve a problem. I also understood his plea for a strong embedding in immediate neighbouring countries within Europe. In my speech in Zurich in February and recently in Australia, I tried to draw attention to the importance that Europe is projecting on the world stage, with the authority and effectiveness that this entails, which is not possible at the moment. We do not use our foreign political instruments enough over a broad front. As a result, we do not play a sufficient role in the Middle East. It is true that Russia has the Benelux economy combined with the three Benelux countries. Look at all the damage it can do with that little bit of money. That means that we have to do the other things as well as NATO. But given Russia's enormous military power, also in relation to Europe, NATO remains very important. For me, it's en-and. You have to do both."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-10-29-eerstekamer-6.u521", "speech text": "The Climate Act mentions not amounts, but a target for CO emissions in 2030 and 2050. The Climate Act does not deal with measures and costs. This would, of course, be a direct claim to the state budget. Then there is the plea that I have also heard, I believe from Mr Kox, to consider whether Turkey should be suspended from NATO because of the situation in Northern Syria. I agree that we condemn the raid. Blok also managed to get that conviction and a de facto arms embargo to Turkey, when I thought it would not work on Monday morning, when I spoke to him just before the Foreign Affairs Council. I think that a suspension of Turkey from NATO is extremely unwise, with all the reasons that go with it. This would remove a vital pillar under NATO and one of the most important partners in the security and defence of that eastern flank. So that's really not something we should do. So yes, address and tackle hard, but we really need Turkey in NATO for our security. That's the point of international defense. Now we come to the national administration. In this context, it discussed, among other things, the major issues relating to implementation. What are we doing about the policy and implementation capacity? Mr Rosenm\u00f6ller and others referred to this, but especially Mr Rosenm\u00f6ller. The Throne speech also goes into this of course and stresses the importance of this, because this is the place where people in the country meet the government. There are no quick solutions to the problems of implementation, I say here. We are particularly committed to this in the Cabinet so that improvements can be made quickly in the places where it is most urgent. That is broad in the government and, by the way, does not depend on the people in the execution, absolutely not. If there are problems in implementation, my perception is that this is almost always the case because we, the politicians, have made it too complex. It's not the quality of the people who work there. Whether it's the Tax Office, DUO, the NVWA or the CBR, good people work. I'd like to say that again. There are major issues about how we shape legislation and about legality and quality of implementation. We're looking at that integrally right now."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-10-29-tweedekamer-18.u214", "speech text": "I am a friend of the SGP but I think Mr Bishop is too weak on this point. Surely the SGP could speak much more explicitly against the horrible prayer call of those tedious minarets that are far too high, of those far too dominant mosques in our streets in our country? Why is Mr Bishop fleeing into all sorts of quasi-universalist defenses? No, this country has centuries of Christian traditions and Christian roots. It's supposed to be here. That's our culture. That's who we are. If people from faraway countries with vast sand plains are so eager to come here to live here, okay, well, you can, but why can't you just say: no, this is the Netherlands, this is Sparta, this is the Netherlands we stand for?"}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-10-30-tweedekamer-8.u61", "speech text": "No, I don't have cover in mind yet. When we come up with proposals, we like to cover them in general, but in legislation we are always a little reluctant to do so. Anyway, if you've already found cover and if we come to two years, we might be able to use that extra coverage for, for example, raising the defense rate or something. So I do see opportunities emerging. I will continue with my second bottleneck: the medical hours limitation. I've heard them come by before. The government paints the prospect that every Wajanger who works more will also earn more. But that picture is probably not always so bright, because there are Wajangers who can work only a limited number of hours for medical reasons. In this bill, these people are particularly vulnerable. At present, for example, they can receive higher benefits when they enter a continuing working scheme. However, given the expiry of this scheme, they are more dependent on assistance, although a more extensive guarantee period may be positive for this group as well. The SGP draws attention to that income exemption in the Participation Act due to a medical hours limitation. Income can now be exempted up to 15% per month, if I have understood correctly. However, I have not been able to read any further in the parliamentary debate any support for this figure or for any other figures in this context. So I have the feeling that this has been chosen somewhat randomly. My question is whether, in the light of the amendment made by this bill, the government can examine what standards are really appropriate for this target group, which reduced medical hours. I don't make statements like: this or that should be it. However, I would like to see some support for this and that this will be really appropriate for this target group. Finally, I come to the bonus, which has also been mentioned earlier. It is of course very acidic when you see all the financial benefits disappear immediately because you have a benefit. The bill can ensure that Wajongers will retain some of that extra income, but that is different with Wajongers who are fully and permanently disabled. I think GroenLinks will be the first to report it. I understand the government's calculation. In these cases, the benefit is also higher than for Wajongers with work capacity. It may lead to perverse incentives if we completely offset all income to 20% of the minimum wage. My question is whether the Secretary of State sees the possibility of applying coulance in this respect. Mr President, I come to a conclusion. I sincerely hope that we will be able to reach as broad a legislative proposal as possible with some compromises and folds. Let's try to cash this opportunity in with each other. I'll leave it at that. Thank you."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-11-06-tweedekamer-6.u42", "speech text": "Yeah, I'm just gonna get on with the honest story. Meanwhile, a crisis in slow motion is taking place in secondary education. Why? Because the agreement is partly defined by teachers who do not have the good papers suddenly no longer \"unqualified\" but \"appointable.\" Of course, that makes very little difference to class practice. Is the Minister prepared to show how many lessons are given in total by unauthorized and appointed teachers? In our opinion, the deficit in secondary education is much greater than a lot of people think. That's what a high school teacher e-mailed us: \"I don't do full-time work anymore. That's really hard to keep up if you want to be there for your own kids and husband. I see people leaving education again because they can't keep up. I see young people heading towards a burnout. At the end of the week I'm all up and during the holidays I'm often sick for the first few days.\" Michel, another teacher in high school, says: \"What I want for education is more teachers, more supervisors, more resources. I want a government that sees teachers as an essential part of a well-functioning society and that is right behind its teachers. More respect for the profession, a field in which knowledge, skills and talent are needed.\" Mr. Chairman. That is why I have tabled an amendment to the proposals. When reckless behavior of bankers plunged us into a deep crisis, we all had to pay for it. People lost their jobs, their homes, came on the zero line for years. The public sector was stripped. Meanwhile, we read in the newspaper that the banks make record profits on the Zuidas. That could be a little less. And then I express myself very kindly, because I don't want to upset the chairman. I think that is important, Mr President! That can be a little less, especially since the people there have an interest in well-educated children. I remember them well: demonstrations there with signs saying \"let the banks pay for the crisis.\" Unfortunately, that never really happened. So we can still settle that. That is why we have an amendment. We propose to increase the bank tax by one billion. They can really spare that. The profits last year were 11 billion for the four largest Dutch banks alone. They'll get over it. With that money you not only solve the pay gap and not only solve the unfair salary in secondary special education, but you give the whole foundation education an extra wage increase: primary or secondary school, regular or special. And why? Because our teachers deserve that and because it is very much necessary to tackle the educational crisis that is afflicting our country. Dare to make a radical choice, but not one such as the cabinet recently made for schools, namely to put one parent in front of the classroom and to do video lessons. So I am referring to a radical and positive choice. A choice for the teacher, who is now drowning, and for the student, who otherwise does not learn to spell or calculate. Is the cabinet prepared to stop using these test balloons and Band-Aids that sometimes pissed teachers off so much and which have touched those teachers to the depths of their professional? Do you want to make a radical choice? Then make it free of charge, ban temporary employment agencies in education and require management to finally give a teacher a permanent contract over time. But stop making those negative choices; intervene in them. Later today, the defense spokesmen of the Chamber will take over. Then the billions here fly through the hall; in the case of the JSF that is literally the case. The billions for the submarines will come after that. Yesterday it was announced that the Netherlands has more millionaires and billionaires than ever before. Last year the Dutch banks made record profits. So let no one here today say that it is simply too expensive, that we have to choose in scarcity and that it has been enough. Minister and Chamber, do not choose submarines today, but teachers. Choose not the billionaires from the Quote, but the students from Rotterdam-Zuid. Do not opt for ABN and ING, but for the teachers' room. That is what the people sitting here in the bleachers deserve and the people who strike out here and in the rest of the country. That deserves our education."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-11-06-tweedekamer-8.u19", "speech text": "I think the SP sometimes talks about a health care fund, and that's not going to happen tomorrow either. I think those are plans for the future, where you say we're going to go that way. Coincidentally, the VVD is now in the cabinet and we are taking careful steps in that direction with 1.5 billion in addition. Those are careful steps that go in the right direction. I'm happy about that. It is a good step in the right direction. Mr. Chairman. The frigates must also have crusader weapons on board and be able to fire. These are so-called tomahawks for land purposes, but they can also be used for surface purposes at sea. For the replacement of the M-frigates that are now under discussion, perhaps we should also think of the replacement of the air defence and command fregates, the LCFs, which is only in the late 1920s. Maybe it's useful again, I'm a layman to have one kind of frigate, but more frigates with identical armament and equipment. That weapon must have the entire range of defence, from close-in goalkeeper, or its successor, to Ballistic Missile Defense, SM-3 or possibly SM-6, and everything in between: Sea Sparrow and Harpoon against surface ships, torpedoes against surface ships, but also against submarines. In short, a fully armed platform that can project an enormous force against the enemy. Fortunately, the combat support ship now gets armament for self-defense, where earlier it was said that that might not happen. For a Navy ship that has to go on mission, there's no other way than that it has armament, at least for self-defense. I often refer to the story of Sir Galahad during the Falklands War. If a ship cannot defend itself, there will always have to be a frigate nearby as soon as there is a risk of violence. But that seems to me to be a very expensive solution. How does the Secretary of State view this? The Dutch submarines should also be able to carry cross-flight weapons and anti-ship missiles, in addition to the important torpedoes already planned. Now let's quickly decide on the purchase of those submarines. And let me repeat once again that the VVD takes defence strategy as its starting point: a strong Dutch industry, coupled with our excellent knowledge institutions, working with the Royal Navy, to arrive at the best boat. And yes, Mr President, I do not use the term \"for the best price\" here. Let us now note that there is no competitive price with state-owned companies that can cover their own risks with state aid and offer equipment below cost. Is the Secretary of State also aware of the fact that the German Government is not planning to award European military equipment, which has been identified as key technology and is important for the security of Germany? Why would the Netherlands still do that? I'd like a response from the Secretary of State. The Air Force's MQ-9 Reaper must also be armed. Why fly around mission areas and identify danger, but cannot intervene? We're restricting the security of the military in mission area. A Reaper is no different than an F-16 or an F-35. They remain manned devices, only with the Reaper the kite is not in the aircraft, but on the ground behind the controls. We are now imposing a political limitation on military efforts."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-11-06-tweedekamer-8.u33", "speech text": "No, but in the end there are a number of tasks that you can do much better in the Netherlands. The use of military personnel in the Netherlands with regard to the security of the Netherlands is better. But we also have a responsibility in the Kingdom. We're gonna have to have a defense for that, too. In NATO too, we have a responsibility for the defence. So all these cases are getting together. I still believe that NATO is the cornerstone of security policy, especially for the VVD. So you're part of a whole. If you are part of a whole it is almost even more important to meet the agreements you make as a group."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-11-06-tweedekamer-8.u48", "speech text": "Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Last September I walked along with my son in the Airborne Hiking Tour, the largest one-day memorial tour in the context of the Battle of Arnhem of 1944. The theme was remembrance, awareness and experience. That was the key point. It was an impressive journey for my son, but also for me, in which I was allowed to speak many fellow walkers. Here, the sense of peace and security lived tremendously, just as the realization of what can happen if we do not know peace and the consequences are great. This awareness is becoming less and less evident among new generations, although not everyone participates in this journey, although the number of participants is very large. This while the insecurity around us is often increasing and also growing in the world. In 2020, Defense will continue to restore and modernise the armed forces. That's very important. Since the budgetary depth of 2014, Defence has just over 3 billion extra to spend by 2020. Defense's budget comes to 11 billion. With the government agreement, this cabinet invests 1.5 billion euros a year in Defence. The Spring Paper 2019 added an occasional \u20ac1.5 billion and a structural \u20ac 162 million per year. There is a record number of investment projects. We must think of new transport aircraft, submarines, frigates, a supply ship, personal equipment, the modernisation of armoured vehicles and investments in IT and cyber. But this is not enough for the future. It is a step forward, but there is also a lot of late maintenance and setbacks. Every day every Dutchman spends about \u20ac1.75 to our army, our military, on peace and security. For \u20ac1,75 you and I buy our safety. For \u20ac1.75 a day we protect our country. For \u20ac1.75 a day, we also send women and men to dangerous areas to help people for our safety. We had more money left in the Netherlands in 2019, 12.3 billion, than we were willing to spend on Defense, 10.4 billion. All the money we spend on social security, with 1% of that budget, you can add almost 10% to the Defence budget, to care, education and to our municipalities and provinces, all the money we spend on it, which is extremely important, will become meaningless in one blow if we are no longer free. It's useless if we don't live safe in this world anymore. At the very moment when the Minister of Finance is defending the budget in the Chamber during the General Financial Reviews, a budget which was agreed in this cabinet, the Prime Minister has written in the newspaper from abroad that more money has to be sent to Defence. I agree with the Prime Minister, but my question is why he says so after Princess Day, after the General Reviews. But has the Secretary of Defense noticed any of this generous statement by the Prime Minister? Or what did the Secretary of Defense notice of this ruling? With the extra budget that Defense has been awarded, it is now heavily invested. The CDA asks the Cabinet whether targeted policies for the exploitation of that investment are also being developed. After all, we can buy equipment, but if we can't maintain it, it's only very short and very few. Then the window is nice, but the warehouse is empty. We have considerable financial blocks on our hands, which are mentioned here and there in the budget, but not with clear figures. For example, how much delay is there for those stocks? How big is the ICT's financial footprint in the coming years? What are the additional costs in the new wage building? And what kind of financial freak is behind the real estate and the practice grounds? I'll get back to you on that. Can the supply chain of materials and logistics be restored with the 2020 budget? A vehicle, a ship or a plane is beautiful, but without supplies, it's no use. Is there a budget for stocks, payroll building, real estate, practice areas, ICT and the supply chain material logistics? Mr. Chairman. The large financial deficit is also somewhat masked by the shortage of staff. There are no less than 8,273 vacancies. One in five military positions is not occupied and the workload is increasing. Nevertheless, absenteeism remains low, a compliment to our women and men. The understaffing means that we can do less, we need less equipment and less supplies and we need to pay fewer people. If we were at full strength, the deficit would become really clear in its full size. To what extent does this underemployment mask the financial problem? And the influx isn't even the biggest problem. It's about the huge outflow from the Defense Department. What makes people not stay with the D.O.D.? And how can we solve that? The personnel, our men and women in uniform are the gold of the defense organization. The CDA welcomes the agreement on working conditions that has been reached. This is crucial for restoring trust, but more is needed to bind and preserve people, as the unions also write in the letter to the Chamber. A new staffing system and a new market-based wage building are needed. That must be ready on 1 July next year, as has been agreed. In fact, the current wage building dates back to the service period, which my colleague Mr Bosman has already mentioned. In particular, the lower framework deserves relatively little. In response to questions to the 2017 BZK report on what government personnel earn compared to the market sector, and defence personnel, the directors refer to this as reasonable, but to what extent does the report reflect the special position of a military? For example, in the CDA's view, training and temporary work allowances are very low. Does the Secretary of State share the criticism that defence's job evaluation system, based on that of the government, should take more account of military competences? And how do the rulers see the space and possibilities in the RVU tax? It is also difficult in terms of rotation, because we have few people. Technical staff is almost impossible to find, as is the case in many sectors in the Netherlands. Technical mbos are picked up with the service car from school or another job and in all ranks we have partially filled battalions, too few soldiers and too few petty officers. This understaffing ensures that many exercises and tasks cannot be performed. This is demotivating on personnel, leaving even more soldiers. We don't have enough Manoeuvre units. According to the NATO standard that we have agreed with ourselves, there must be four, but I think we only have three. The problems apply to all parts of Defense, because at the military level it will also be extra pressure around the Brexit. On top of the already high pressure, additional requests, such as from the police, to secure judges and officers after the murder of attorney Derk Wiersum. If we can believe the newspaper, the Marechaussee has not yet responded to this distress call. Is that right? The KMar itself claims to be overloaded with the security of mosques, synagogues, the Second Chamber and the airport Schiphol, which was also on the news about this tonight. Is this message correct and what can the rulers do about it? By the way, the police also continue to attract the people of the KMar, because the police are looking for people again. The pressure of military deployment is enormous due to shortages in the chain. If technicians go on mission with two helicopters, then everything around the helicopters in the Netherlands stands still. The current military force is what we managed to maintain financially after a quarter cuts. There hasn't been room for real future vision yet. That is why the review of the Defence Note is urgently needed. The Minister informed the Chamber quite a bit about that on 2 October. What tasks do we expect from the Defense Department? What are we good at and are we going to strengthen it? What are we less strong at, and are we going to repel it or raise it? What does NATO and the UN expect from us and what does the EU expect from us? More importantly, how do we contribute to peace and security in the world and the importance of the Netherlands? In the letter, the Minister states that she is clearly involving the Chamber and also external parties in order to achieve this review. The CDA looks forward to the discussion and looks forward to the input of the Ministry of Defence and also of external experts in order to form a reasoned opinion. The women and men of our armed forces are doing very important and good work. Every effort is a tough one for the organisation, because equipment, supplies and staff are very scarce. We're currently at the lowest number of people broadcast since times: 480 if I'm right. It is precisely in these missions that we do important work to prevent major problems and danger closer to home. In Afghanistan last month we visited the Dutch Mountain camp in Mazar-e-Sharif and the NATO headquarters of Resolute Support in Kabul. We have seen for ourselves what progress is being made between all the violence of setbacks. The dishonorable thing about the work of our military is that the eyes of the world and also of the Netherlands are often focused on the progress that the Taliban sometimes make, while those same eyes often seem to be closed to the lasting progress that our armed forces make possible there. The Netherlands is there to ensure that the Afghan army and the Afghan police will be able to guarantee their own security in the future."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-11-06-tweedekamer-8.u60", "speech text": "I think the Secretary of State is there as Secretary of State for Defence and not on behalf of a party. That's the first thing. Second. The SP wants to cut 3 billion dollars on defense. The SP just had the story about what the defense should look like. But then the SP must also admit that the SP Defense Department is actually some sort of Boy Scout club behind the dikes. How does the SP see its own Defense Department?"}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-11-06-tweedekamer-8.u70", "speech text": "No, no. Again, I didn't cut anything. You've been cutting back. At that time, I thought about how it should be if we want to cut back. At least it shouldn't be like the VVD did. We have seen the consequences of this in recent years; I have mentioned a number of them. I have just indicated that we do not buy expensive submarines. We don't buy expensive jets either. We don't need any to defend our country. What we do want is to have our defenses in order. We will have to look at exactly what that should look like under these circumstances. Your lobby, your submarine lobby, your military-industrial complex with large armament and want to continue to engage in permanent warfare in countries like Afghanistan for 18 years, making it more unsafe... I would advise the VVD, Mr Bosman, to reconsider that strategy. That's exactly my plea. If you're willing to do that, we can find out which Defense Department is one of them."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-11-06-tweedekamer-8.u72", "speech text": "So Mrs Karabulut has no idea what her defense organization should look like. So that's clear. It's not \"my\" lobby. I think that's inappropriate. There's a lobby. We know that. It's just going on. That goes for a lot of things. There are also NGOs, human rights organisations and all kinds of other organisations lobbying."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-11-06-tweedekamer-8.u119", "speech text": "Mr. Chairman. I do not have much speaking time tonight, but I would like to begin by expressing a word of thanks and appreciation to the people of the Royal Marechaussee who took action at Schiphol tonight. It only shows that she and their colleagues in the other aid and security services are always ready for our security. In one of my first defence debates, I said that I had never talked about culture as much as I had been since I became a spokesman for Defence. That hasn't changed. Last week we got a look at the culture at the officer training of the army, the KMA. It appears to be an ideal breeding ground for abuses. If you're not in on it, you're not really in on it as leader of tomorrow. That is not going to change if you let tomorrow's leaders train and guide them by today's leaders who have grown up in the same culture. Is the Minister prepared to break that pattern by assigning people from outside to a few crucial places, for the guidance of cadets? So that's about people who aren't infected with that culture. And is the Minister also prepared to continue to ask me to open an external hotline for complaints about social security before? So far, such hotlines have always produced significantly more reports than when people have to knock on the door to the Defense Department themselves. We all know why. I've been pushing for more money for a decent collective agreement for the people of Defense, because that's what they deserve. That extra money has finally come and the new collective agreement has come. Late and after a process that has not increased people's confidence, but now there is. As a first step, because more are needed. A new, modern function and reward building could be such a step. That's gonna cost extra money, especially if the new building wants to make Defense a more attractive employer. And I have to. However, there is no additional funding in the budget. Do, I say, because otherwise you run the risk of the beginning of trust disappearing like snow before the sun. If it's going to take much longer than it has been agreed and if it's going to be a lot more hassle again, because you haven't spent enough money on it. Mr. Chairman. The new collective agreement does not mean that the back door is already closed, quite the contrary. For example, many 30s and 40s leave the Department of Defense. That sucks, often for themselves, but also for the Defense Department. They are people who have invested a lot and who can do a lot, often have even more to do and can be years of added value. You can't just replace it with someone who comes in new. What do our rulers think about giving people in certain functions a serious or a more serious stay bonus? For example, I call Marines and Commandos. The emptiness among them continues; we are approaching a critical point. Other countries have such a bonus and it works, I hear. I think the defense should take unorthodox measures to get to strength, no, what do I say, stay on strength! That does not happen automatically, not when I listen to the Commander of the Armed Forces, who has already philosophized twice in the newspaper about re-establishing the duty of attendance, and not when I look at the filling rates that remain at 80%. That is far too low to be able to do what we need to do, especially when we see that we will have to put even more on the mat in NATO. I have said before that if we are not careful in the future, the question of our vision, our mission and how we are going to carry it out will not so much be determined by what is necessary and what we want, but by what we can still do in terms of people. Mr. Chairman. There's more money going to the DOD. That's what I'm supposed to do. What we also see is that the Defense Department doesn't always manage to turn that money into people and resources. Almost no material project reaches the original planning, from the submarines, to the M-frigates to the marine barracks. I actually want a smart-formulated plan in which I can see how much money is needed when it is spent, at what rate and at what rate, and in which I can see what we can deliver and how ambitions become reality. If we can convert the money into people, material and capabilities so difficult now, how can we do that if we are moving towards that 2%? Moreover, as far as the way in which equipment is to be tendered is concerned, we often talk about the French, but I would also like to point out, as Mr Bosman has said, to Germany, where it is always the case to stop all European procurement. I ask the Secretary of State to follow suit. The opposite is happening around the real estate of the Defense Department. The Minister is running out of money for investment in this area. That's why money goes from equipment to real estate. Where's the DOD gonna feel that? Is the material side so spacious in his jacket that more can be done there, for example for the staff? I'm gonna finish up. I do this by calling attention again to a few groups that I have spoken about before, starting with the people of the Marechaussee. They guard our safety, including here and at Schiphol. Can we now agree that those decent raincoats, which I mentioned earlier, are common at the end of this year, for example? Last year the Secretary of State reported that it should be possible to settle quickly. It hasn't happened yet, but it has to. Then the chrome-6 victims. How long must the suffering of these people, who have been bullied for years by their employer, so Defense Department? In my view, now that the money released for the people in question is far from being spent, I propose that a gesture be made to them. Don't let it be a long shot, if only because those people don't have it anymore, literally. Solve this as you might expect from a good employer. That's what the DOD wants to be, isn't it? I'm coming to the federal walk-in houses. I understand the Minister doesn't want municipalities to sit back when she says, \"I'll take care of it all.\" Also, I understand she's not in the mood for a generic arrangement. So let's see where and when walk-in homes get into trouble and then deliver customization. Two weeks ago, I visited our people in Afghanistan with a number of colleagues. Men and women of armed forces and police are doing very important work there in dangerous conditions, for our safety and for our children's safety. I have a lot of respect for that. I thank them for that, even from this place."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-11-06-tweedekamer-8.u121", "speech text": "Mr. Chairman. 75 years of freedom is not self-evident. In the year 2020, we will consider in detail the fact that we were liberated 75 years ago. We were liberated from a tyrannical foreign domination. Since then, we have been living in peace and security for 75 years. That's something to be very grateful for. I also express that gratitude towards our military. But it's not something that's self-evident at this time. NATO and the US are our main allies for peace and security, especially for a relatively small country like the Netherlands, but these guarantees are no longer self-evident. President Trump is right to ask for greater contributions from EU Member States and a NATO member, Turkey, to be a great risk to our own security. Our most loyal ally against ISIS was driven out, allowing IS to group again and probably IS-fighters to go uncontrolled towards the Netherlands. The European Union has also ensured peace and security in recent decades. But this union is also under tension. We know that the United Kingdom may want to get out and that other countries, in Eastern Europe, do not really contribute to stability when it comes to violations of the values of the rule of law. Sureties we trusted aren't so sure anymore. That is why I come to a number of points of interest on behalf of the Christian Union, which I would like to stress to the rulers. Firstly, the Defence Equipment Budget Fund. Each year, the Christian Union also insists on the restoration of basic readiness. That is also the reason why D66 and the Christian Union together argued for the Defence Equipment Budget Fund last year. I am therefore pleased that the relevant legislative proposal is now before us. This fund should help to prevent the defence budget from falling prey to drastic cuts as easily as before. I hope the law will be passed soon. Then there are the strategic choices concerning the submarines. The restoration of our defense demands and demands that we make strategic choices. But when it comes to new submarines, those choices take a long time. The B letter about the submarines would come first this spring and then around the summer. It is now November and the letter is still not there. What's going on, I'm asking the Secretary of State. What are the reasons for this long delay? Strategic choices for the Christian Union are about the greatest possible involvement of Dutch industry, not only about the economic interests of that industry, but also to preserve its own knowledge and capacity for the future. Because they keep threatening to disappear. Does the Secretary of State agree with me on that point? The Chamber adopted a motion by Mrs Bruins Slot at the beginning of this year. This motion instructs the Cabinet to accommodate the design, development, construction, maintenance and final direction of the submarines within the so-called golden triangle. It seems to me that this motion gives a clear direction to the process leading to the B letter. Then what is the problem, I ask the Secretary of State."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-11-06-tweedekamer-8.u126", "speech text": "Mr. Chairman. Today is a special day, not only because we are dealing with the defence budget, but also because today is Thanksgiving for Crop and Labour. Unlike tonight, I was lucky enough to attend a service this afternoon in my own church church in Elspeet; an oasis of peace so between all those Defence debates. I hope that at least today the Minister has found a moment of peace, because that is what I wish her. But when I sit there under such a sermon and hear the words of Jesus, it always makes me long for a new heaven and a new earth. Why? On such a new earth where there is no more war and where there is peace, you no longer need defence. But yes, as long as we live on this earth, the SGP likes to cooperate in a strong defense. In this respect, we will try to play our part in this budgetary process. That is why I would like to review a number of issues, Mr President, and I will start with the F-35. Last week, like Mr Bosman, as well as Mr De Vries and the Minister and the Secretary of State, I was present at Leeuwarden Airport at the reception of the first F-35. Mrs. Diks, you were there? I didn't hit you, I apologized! Good of you to come! I hear all these noises, but I'm not gonna respond to them, Mr. Chairman. It has to be an interruption first. Then let's talk about it. Anyway, I was very impressed by the strength, versatility and also the intelligence of that fifth-generation yacht plane. Let me say straight away: we as SGP are very happy with the purchase of nine additional devices. Last year our motion was dissuaded and voted away, but in such a year there has been a lot of clear insight. The question we do have at the same time is whether that number of 46 is sufficient to achieve the Dutch goals of staying safe, bringing safety and connecting safely. Would the Secretary of State consider the possibilities for purchasing a larger number of F-35s at a decreasing unit price in the future? Mr President, my next topic is the NATO standard. Not only the SGP, but also this Minister and Secretary of State have a warm heart for Defence. When I see their passion, I'd almost say they're on fire. But I think I've also set Mrs. Diks on fire, so I'm just gonna stop. For the DOD, that's what I'm talking about, isn't it?"}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-11-06-tweedekamer-8.u137", "speech text": "Mr. Chairman. The Ministry of Defense sometimes looks like the Ministry of Secret Affairs. The word \"secret\" appears nine times in the defense budget. Confidentiality is sometimes a necessity, especially when it comes to protecting your people's lives. But secrecy is too often a cover-up in practice. On page 3 of the budget, I see an amount of EUR 10 million under the heading'secret'. Why is this post classified? How can I check, on behalf of the Dutch people, whether these expenditures are sensible and meaningful? What am I supposed to imagine at the secret post? Are we talking about the night vision goggles, coats or pickup trucks sent to the Syrian rebels, or other expenses we're not supposed to know about? Mr. Chairman. The budget also explains only changes amounting to EUR 100 million or more, while ordinary citizens have to justify every euro in their tax returns. Will the defense budget be an inaccessible black box? In our opinion, the DOD needs to get rid of the secrecy story. DENK wants to end this secrecy. How can I, as a Member of Parliament, monitor, under budgetary law, what the government is spending, as the word secret is too common and things are not explained? I'd like a response from the Minister. Mr. Chairman. DENK has a consistent story about the Defence budget since it was founded. DENK stands for a Ministry of Defence that focuses on peace and reconstruction, not international bombing sessions for the great powers. DENK doesn't want to stop military and billions in Defense to serve the great powers. DENK stands for: the basis on order, a good equipment and reward for our military and sufficient staff. We do not want expensive prestige projects such as the JSF and the new submarines, not international bombing missions, but an army dedicated to bringing peace and justice."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-11-06-tweedekamer-8.u157", "speech text": "I understand that agreements were made at first, while suddenly we started earlier. We have the defense budget here. I am allowed to interrupt twice in two stages, while it is about an entire budget. Now there is also such a shocking remark, which speaks of a very bad remark from yesterday's law. Because the gentleman is being prosecuted by an attorney, he's suddenly gonna make up for it, while the verdict is definitely done and that several times. And we're still not allowed to say anything. I think that we should actually increase the number of interruptions, and it is a pity that it will become later."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-11-06-tweedekamer-8.u168", "speech text": "I just indicated how we are in our defense strategy. We've been doing that consistently for four years. You can read in our party program how we want DOD."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-11-07-tweedekamer-10.u251", "speech text": "That could be for example. I find it really unwise to make statements in a motion about resources in a subsequent cabinet period and then to say in this Chamber that schools should interpret it as if it were already structural. I think that's unwise, and I think it's false. You just shouldn't, for the simple reason that we might be in a whole different situation later and you can't keep that promise. In addition, I assume that any cover within the budget will have to be found. Are you going to take half a billion from culture, or half a billion from the media? If you want to look outside that budget, are you going to take away half a billion dollars from care or from Social Affairs? Are you taking 10% of the defense budget, the security of our country?"}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-11-07-tweedekamer-3.u141", "speech text": "I've been talking to POMS employees myself. Many employees are also employed by the Defense Department. So I know the stories. I have also spoken to people at various meetings that I have organised before. They impress me too, because it's about people who have worked with soul and salvation for the defense. So I also recognize the stories. It is important that we try to provide proper care for these people, to see how we ensure that these people are recognised and recognised. We are also doing everything we can to see if that is possible. Whether that is to compensate for one's own risk, to give an example, or whether one can ask all kinds of questions and get support in them, that is what we are focusing on. You have received an e-mail and I would also like to receive it if you wish, through you, Chairman. Those stories affect me too, because this is about us. What I would like to propose to Mrs Karabulut... You're making some kind of false contradiction as if we're not willing to take care of our employees, our former employees. That is what we absolutely want. That's what it's all about all the time. When it comes to aftercare for chromium-6, former employees have also been asked what they still need, what it means. We will continue to do so. That has nothing to do with purchasing equipment. This is not a discussion about money, because we care about our aftercare when it comes to reintegration. Whether it's for veterans or for our employees, that's what it's all about. I see that Mrs Karabulut may want to create a false contradiction that is not there. On the contrary, we want to ensure that there is good care. I have also indicated that, when it comes to the employees who worked with chromium-6 at the POMS sites, together with the power stations and RIVM, we have looked into the possibility of designing a scheme that meets the research, but also what is the practice in the Netherlands in this type of scheme. There is no need to fight the judge, because almost no case in this matter comes before the courts."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-11-07-tweedekamer-3.u148", "speech text": "I'll take this case with me. I have just mentioned this to Mrs Karabulut. It's the spirit we have. I've just indicated that it's about compensating for one's own risk. In addition, we ask RIVM what we can do for employees who are not yet sick, but who may be worried. Is there anything you can think of that you could do in terms of research? Those are all things that are aimed at that. So I'd like to hear from this case, so we can write it down to see what's going on there and see if there's a solution. The general line from us is to look at aftercare as much as possible, where it is always a search what it means wider. I will come back to that. Mr President, I would like to go to equipment, if I may. Yes, you're nodding. It is good to take you into our material projects and what is being done in them. The Minister has already, in a general sense, addressed what has happened and done in the past period. I think it's good to give you some figures on where we come from. In 2016, we had a 16% investment quota. In 2019 it will be 23%. In 2016, we had a liability position, i.e. the amount of contracts and the value of those contracts in that year, of 2.6 billion. In 2019, that was 5.9 billion. The fact that extra investment has been made, not just the 1.5 billion, but all the work to ensure that that train gets on steam, is all about that. This does not mean that all projects are going well. Things can always come up in there. But the fact that we have gone from 2.6 billion to 5.9 billion already indicates that the investment train, so to speak, has started to run. This may be less visible to you, because you will see in the Defence Project Overview the final result of the projects we are actually going to complete, but of course we are also doing a lot of things in the preparatory phase. To take you into account, the number of projects we have in preparation has doubled compared to 2016. We do that to our people from the Defense Material Organization. We do this at the front by making sure that we are prepared for the future, because we see very well that the future of Defence will change in a changing security environment and that, in addition to your staff, your equipment must also be prepared for it. But we're actually investing. For the past two years, I've given you 30 A letters. As I said, the figures speak for themselves. However, a number of projects are delayed. Mrs. Diks asked for that. That's right: a number of projects are delayed. Sometimes it's because that's what we want. One example is the large clothing projects. We have decided, also in the context of personnel care and ensuring that your people get the good stuff, that everyone gets a helmet and that the clothing package is also reinforced in terms of material and quantity. We're gonna keep on betting on that. We'll make sure there's a choice package for combat boots. In every possible way we try to strengthen the clothing. It'll slow it down. Sometimes it is delayed because the supplier has problems with the delivery. So it's different at once. If you look at all the overviews of the defence projects, we had 57 in the book in 2016. We've got 78 now. In 2016, 45% of the projects had been delayed. We're at 28% now. We still want to bring that down further, but it does show that we are working with man and power to get those projects done. I am proud that we are able to achieve this with each other in a market that attracts and in which not only we invest, but also other European countries do. You can see that the industry itself is struggling to handle all the questions in a good way and in good time. Then a number of questions were asked by Mr De Roon, Mr Voordewind and Mr Bosman on the replacement of submarines. That is one of our major projects, because they are one of our most important weapons systems. As you know, we've developed a defense industry strategy. We established it with the Chamber at the beginning of this year. As you know, we started this project in 2015. That was in the previous cabinet period, without a new DIS. We have established it on the basis of the coalition agreement. We considered it important to include these new DIS in an ongoing procurement procedure. This must be done with care and transparency. We're in the middle of that process. It's an ongoing procurement process. So you also have to make sure you know how to do it in a good way. That's what we're doing. I have indicated that further information from the CIS has been requested. In my letter of April to the Chamber, I also indicated that the mandate was given. I hope to be able to send this year's letter, the B letter, to discuss it with the Chamber and see what follow-up steps are needed and whether the Chamber will agree to it. As you know, it is important to deal with these matters in the CIS. We no longer have a self-creating industry for submarines in the Netherlands, but from the DIS we clearly look at what it means. I see questions. All of a sudden, three men are coming."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-11-07-tweedekamer-3.u170", "speech text": "That choice will then lie with us. So that means that the total amount... Imagine, in the end, the defense budget has to go to 16 billion a year; I'm just gonna call it a crazy number. That story will then be laid down, because those are the things that need to be done. Will that be submitted? Or is it presented: no, this is a budget of 11 billion that is growing a little, perhaps 12 billion, and we can fit it into that? That's my concern. Do not squash the security situation in the money we have, but determine that security situation and tell us how much money we need for that. That's my question."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-11-07-tweedekamer-9.u5", "speech text": "Mr. Chairman. It's always good to start with history, as the minister did. We stand here the year we commemorate 75 years of freedom. That freedom does not come naturally and has value. How do we determine that value? How do we ensure that this freedom is actually maintained? Freedom is neither self-evident nor self-evident. I've been spokesperson Water for a while. People have no idea what we're doing to get that water out of the tap. Before the water comes out of the tap, it has to be removed from somewhere, it has to be purified and so on. And in the Netherlands we wash our car with it. People have no sense of the value of water, but they think it should be there. Why don't you take the water away for an hour? The questions of the House will come by themselves. The same applies to safety. We accept that there is, but we wonder how much we need to invest for it. That's why it's important that we keep having this conversation. We are members of NATO, but also of the European Union, which is becoming increasingly important. The investment for the defence of the European Union is a responsibility of its own. It is not so much that we are called upon to invest, but we have an intrinsic value to defend. We ourselves think we should have our defenses in order. As Mr Stoffer said, the Germans are working towards 1.5% in 2024 and then on to 2% around 2030, 2031. But those Germans are gonna take a lot more than that. They take cybersecurity as part of security, and rightly so. But they also take space in the context of security, and rightly so. We also discussed the space domain here in the Chamber. It is a rapidly growing domain, but we still have to take a step in that. Well, I'm glad the Minister's gonna say the same thing, but that story's not gonna happen until next year. Those are steps that are being taken too late. The odds are now. There's money in investment funds. This cabinet is committed to investment. I suppose this is part of those investments, both in space and in cyber. Let's take that into account in terms of security. I am very curious to know what the Minister thinks of that. Mr President, then the staff. It's one of the basic things we talked about. People are committed to peace and security wherever in the world. We talked about our liberators 75 years ago. Young people 17, 18 years old from the American Midwest. They had never heard of Europe, but they were here to free us. Military personnel step in without a problem to go somewhere to bring peace and security. That staff is worth gold. I welcome the added money, including through the Spring paper, for working conditions, but these steps need to be taken. Mr. Chairman. You won't be surprised that I'm looking forward to the results of the flexible staffing system. But the words that have been spoken do me good, let me put it this way. The equipment. The minister already mentioned that we once had 211 F-16s. But I say, in 1955, we had a thousand planes in the Royal Air Force. A thousand! We are now going to 46 F-35s, but I assume that this number will grow even further, given what the NATO letter has been written and because it is such a force multiplier towards the future. Mr. Chairman. It's time to dedicate material and not to outsource it. It's time to move on. I understand the whole procedure with the DMP and the importance of care and I therefore welcome the Minister's answers. Mr President, I have a motion on the equipment. [[Motion]] [[The Chamber,]] [[heard the debate,]] [[Whereas the MQ-9 Reaper is still unarmed;]] [[calls on the Government to inform the Chamber of the need to adapt in order to arm the Reaper,]] [[and goes to the order of the day.]] [[This motion was tabled by Mr Bosman, Mr Van Helvert, Mr Voordewind and Mr Stoffer. It seems to me that their submission is sufficiently supported.]] [[She's getting No. kst-35300-X-23]]"}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-11-07-tweedekamer-9.u40", "speech text": "Mr. Chairman. This is the third day we've talked about defense. This room doesn't seem to get enough of it. I very much welcome the commitments and the follow-up to D66's important questions. Of course, the same applies to those of my colleagues, but I cannot necessarily be personally happy about that. I think that this budget is a good start to doing nice things for the armed forces and doing good things for the staff. I wish the Secretary of State and the Minister every success in giving substance to this budget in the coming year. Finally, I have one motion. [[Motion]] [[The Chamber,]] [[heard the debate,]] [[whereas interpreters who have worked for the Dutch armed forces have a special position and therefore deserve recognition and, if necessary, protection;]] [[Notes that persons engaged in international military missions in Afghanistan, in particular interpreters and guards, are classified in the update of the EASO Country Guidance on Afghanistan as systematically persecuted group and Taliban target;]] [[calls on the Government to align the interpretation protection policy with the EASO Country Guidance on Afghanistan and to consider them systematically prosecuted, and when it is necessary for Defence to prefer interpreting in future military missions, to work with interpreters who have a contract with the Dutch State and to state that they deserve protection when they are in direct and personal danger,]] [[and goes to the order of the day.]] [[This motion was tabled by Mr Belhaj and Mr Voordewind. It seems to me that their submission is sufficiently supported.]] [[She's getting No. kst-35300-X-32]]"}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-11-07-tweedekamer-9.u109", "speech text": "Then there is a motion from Mr Kerstens, on item No. 37. I'm going to dissuade him with the explanation that there's no money left, just to put it down like that. The RIVM investigation is still ongoing. We have, of course, initially conducted the investigations at the POMS locations. To this end, we had the coulance scheme and now we have the benefit scheme that we have established together with the trade unions. But the investigation into CARC and the investigation into the other defense sites is still ongoing. This arrangement is open to former employees and employees. In that sense, there is no money left. That's why I'm dissuading the motion."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-11-12-eerstekamer-10.u222", "speech text": "What strikes me is that the Minister again puts words in my mouth that I do not take in my mouth. That is also a bit why I have just made this remark. The Minister is addressing the Chamber with a number of concerns which at least my party has about the possibility that it could get out of hand with the external hire, either in the amount of the external hire, or in the amount of what is paid for it. Surely the Minister could have said that he understands that this concern lives with our party and that he will try to monitor that it will not come to that? But he immediately fired into the defense in a certain way, which I wonder whether that reassures me or not. That's exactly why I just made the point that I didn't make it better when it comes to how positive I am about this bill."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-11-13-tweedekamer-4.u72", "speech text": "I have just spoken very clearly and very critically about Turkey's wrongdoings. I think it is rare for Mrs Karabulut and I to really agree. However, we agree on the criticism of Turkey's illegal actions. Let's just say that for once. NATO is essential to keep us safe. It is the strongest alliance in world history. It's what gives us protection from outside threats. We must not weaken NATO as the Socialist Party always wishes, or perhaps it wants us to leave it. I don't know what the current position is. We must cherish NATO, and we must strengthen it. If there are problems there, and there are problems, I have just appointed them myself, then we have to deal with them. We shouldn't, as the SP keeps saying, cut defense, run away and be critical of everything. No, you have to deal with it, you have to do things."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-11-13-tweedekamer-4.u181", "speech text": "The answer is yes. Perhaps the best example is the first point that Mr Koopmans mentioned, namely peace and security. As you may imagine, I have been with you for some time in GroenLinks and also in the parties that formed GroenLinks. If something has changed within GroenLinks over the years, it is thinking in terms of peace and security, the importance of peace operations and the importance of defence spending. We were a party that always cut billions on defense if you look at the passing on of our election program. Mr Koopmans will have noticed that this is no longer the case. So we also believe that there are a number of areas where you need to invest in defence. That was for my party a very big move we've made in the last ten years. I grant the VVD that they make such a move, perhaps occasionally the other way. Only, at the VVD I see a movement in a direction that I find very undesirable on a number of points. So the answer is yes. The answer is also yes where migration deals are concerned. We have always said that we are not against migration deals, provided they meet a number of conditions. I note that no migration deal has been concluded in recent years, despite what the government agreement says about it. If such a deal is made, we will look into whether it meets the conditions. We are not, in principle, opposed to concluding migration deals. We never were."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-11-13-tweedekamer-4.u188", "speech text": "No, that was about investing in defense."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-11-13-tweedekamer-4.u189", "speech text": "Investing in defense, yes."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-11-13-tweedekamer-4.u190", "speech text": "Does GroenLinks now positively want more money to go to defense?"}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-11-13-tweedekamer-4.u308", "speech text": "I have said that Israel always has the right to defend itself, but that it cannot be that it shoots people in the back from afar. That can't be part of the defense, and that's not right. The Minister has said that there will be an investigation. We'll wait and see how we deal with it. So a fair question to the Minister is: what about the investigation and what reaction does the government have to this? I'm really looking forward to that."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-11-14-tweedekamer-24.u97", "speech text": "Indeed, the Minister remains in the position where he stood with the defense that Assad has done terrible things. We agree on that. I do not think that was the point of discussion either. What the Minister does say, and I do not think that is right, is that Mr Van Helvert suggests that we should accept it. That suggestion was not made and I did not say it. What I have said is that we must acknowledge that we have not succeeded in getting him out of there. You can say that you are not going to accept that either, but at the moment when we are not prepared to do anything about it, when the United States moves away, we will have to acknowledge that he is there for the time being. Then the Minister says 'if the Netherlands should take the lead', but I never suggested that either. I said, can we make a small opening? In fact, that leadership has already taken on someone else: Denmark, the Czech Republic, Poland, and France. The French Minister has also said that it is no longer possible to speak. So those suggestions weren't made. Does the Minister recognise that if Assad stays where he is and we don't scare him away, he will have a role in future stability in that region? That's my question."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-11-20-tweedekamer-2.u14", "speech text": "Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to begin my speech with an urgent matter. I hope Minister Grapperhaus will listen carefully. It is about the threats and the fatwas that my group chairman has been receiving for 15 years. My party political story will come soon, but this goes beyond party political importance. You remember, Minister Grapperhaus, that my group leader, Mr Wilders, in August last year, in the run-up to the Mohammed cartoon competition, was proclaimed a fatwa by the influential Pakistani spiritual Khadim Hussein Rizvi. The fatwa about Mr Wilders was as follows: everyone who has acquaintances in the Netherlands must approach them and tell them to kill that blasphemist, the blasphemer. Every Muslim living in the Netherlands must go to the blasphemer's house and kill him, says Khadim Hussein Rizvi about Mr Wilders. The day before yesterday, Mr Wilders was informed by the prosecution and the police that that Pakistani Islamic preacher repeated his fatwa against Mr Wilders, after having a video translated from Urdu. This showed that Rizvi, after being released from prison in May of this year, after a six-month detention for resisting the acquittal of the Christian Asia Bibi in Pakistan, once again threatens Mr Wilders with death in front of a large crowd. His call to decapitate Wilders was enthusiastically received by a crowd of Muslims who then all shouted slogans to decapitate Wilders, slit his throat. We know that followers of Islamic preachers actually follow fatwas. It's a death sentence being pronounced. There are over one and a half billion Muslims in the world, a quarter of the world's population. Some of them, even quite a percentage, follow this Islamic preacher and thus follow his fatwa. So is Yunaid I. Last year the same imam called for the murder of Geert Wilders. Several Pakistani have then tried to take action and travelled to the Netherlands to slaughter Geert Wilders in his home or in the Lower House. Luckily, one of these guys got caught. Fortunately, the judges were so wise to give this terrorist nearly twice as much jail time as the prosecutor demanded. Salute for these judges, but this shows that Islamic preacher Rizvi must be taken very seriously. And a year after the first fatwa, he does it again. Today, now, Mr. Wilders is reporting this man again. I know that police and prosecutors and the services have been aware of this since the end of October, but my appeal to the minister is: do more, defend our democracy, defend our parliamentarians, stand for freedom of expression and never accept threats or violence! Bring your Pakistani fellow minister in, force him to pick up this life-threatening Rizvi, who has also said that an atomic bomb must be thrown into the Netherlands. What are you going to do now, Minister Grapperhaus? This is a Dutch Member of Parliament, a group chairman of the second party of the Netherlands, an opposition leader who is threatened for the second time with a fatwa and more than that. Has the Pakistani ambassador been summoned since the end of October? Is Rizvi's arrest demanded? Have you called the Dutch ambassador back yet? Have you discussed with your colleague, Mr Blok, what actions can the Netherlands take towards Pakistan? As is well known, after the first fatwa against Mr Wilders, the State requested legal aid from Pakistan to persuade the authorities there to question Rizvi as a suspect of threat and sedition, as did the national cricket player Latif who had put a 3 million Pakistani rupee premium on Wilders' head. Are you going to take more firm steps now? I'd like to hear from you what you've done and what you're going to do. What is the situation after this second fatwa with the safety of Mr Wilders, who has lost his freedom for more than fifteen years because of threats and fatwas and who now has to fear again that idiots will visit him at home or in the Second Chamber to slit his throat? What is the situation with that, I ask the Minister. Is the security secure enough? The Justice and Security budget. It should be about numbers. How much do we spend and is it enough? Is it enough to make the Dutch rule of law robust and to make the Netherlands safe? As long as the ministry is rotten, as long as it acts as only mob gangs act, it doesn't make much sense to look at the numbers. 'Cause it's not nothing. Julio Poch was thrown by Minister Hirsch Ballin, the CDA predecessor of Grapperhaus for the Argentine lions: Barbertje had to hang to serve a higher state interest. All exculpatory documents concerning Poch and all documents that could demonstrate the reprehensible behaviour of Hirsch Ballin and the officials of this ministry and the prosecution have disappeared. A few years later, the VVD Minister of Justice and Security Opstelten ordered Geert Wilders to finish politically, \u00e0 la Pim Fortuyn, only through the Minister's Public Prosecutor's Office. Grapperhaus and all the state's attorneys are anxiously withholding essential information from this case. No one can know how corrupt this ministry is. They are doing everything they can to hide how they and their predecessors and top officials have trampled on the foundations of the rule of law. North Korea is jealous of the way in which this Ministry and this OM deal with the group leader of the second party of the Netherlands, a critical MP and opposition leader. And North Korea is jealous of the way successive ministers and officials get away with this behavior. Who are happy with this ministry? Those are the paedophiles of the Netherlands. They barely get caught. If they get caught, they rarely get real punishment. If they are caught and turned out to be members of the caste of Grapperhaus, if they turn out to be employees of Grapperhaus, if they are former board members of the youth association of the VVD, the party of Minister Dekker, if they are chief prosecutor, then they will be beaten by their friends. Those pedophiles, who commit crimes against young defenseless victims, then escape the dance. The Mafia is tough, but takes good care of its own people and now it has turned out to be also for its own paedophiles. The Ministry is cheating and messing around. They cover it up when asylum seekers commit serious crimes. The Netherlands should not know that: that would only be in the hands of the PVV."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-11-20-tweedekamer-7.u150", "speech text": "That's what it's meant to be. Please don't leave. I'll look more in that direction, too. In any case, I say to you: if I read that statement, then every day on the floor of the Ministry of Justice the sun rises; one goes whistling to his work, one works for the good, it is a meaningful daily use. On the work floor, as I understand from the pleading, it goes hand in hand. That's what you get to hear. Everything that is viewed, all processes: everything is inclusive. One always works proactively, without exception. Every once in a while, that word comes out. Proactive! People are also very satisfied with the working relationship between them. At the back of the pleading are enthusiastic employee reports. Without exception, they inspire each other there that it has a nature. It's really expensive to read all this. However, the krona is still very proud of the particular degree of transparency that is being exercised on this ministry day in and day out. I've tried to tarnish how often that word occurs. It's \"transparent\" here and \"transparent\" there. It goes from somewhere to nowhere, but when the word \"transparent\" falls, it seems to fall into good ground. That word passes through in the midst of all this woeful policy jargon so often, you'd think it had to cover something up. Perhaps a lack of transparency, because nowhere in these reports do you find that openness in this ministry has been forced to do so because of the WOB and because of the threat of interim measures. That's what opened the doors. The past year was not characterised by spontaneous transparent behaviour and the expression of frankness, also towards this house, on the part of this ministry. But in any case, transparency is a priority. However, I would like to give some clarification on this transparency. I think it's time for a state-of-the-art moment. We must also look at the situation with regard to the rule of law in the Netherlands, especially where politics can be held responsible for certain matters. I call it the Wilders Process. I'd like to have an update on that from the D.A.'s office. Because the Ministry's involvement in the course of that process has proved to be rather obvious, and that is something that the government and the Minister of Justice have to look at. I'd say it's time to get rid of some dirt. This has proved to be a political process. It deserves our attention in this house. We must be able to confront the Minister with the course of this matter, as it is now taking place. There's still time, because the trial's still going on. This has clearly proved to be a political process. This is the biggest miscarriage, one of the biggest miscarriages, you can say, in the modern Dutch criminal history. It is unworthy of a defenceable rule of law. I'm giving an update on my side. The declarations had already been set up and facilitated by the public authorities. The parade: in columns. Rulers first, wallowing in self-esteem. Declaration offices were open until late hours. Pre-printed declaration paper ashes were already ready. The ordinary citizen who wants to go to the police station with his broken car window looks out his eyes when he reads this report. The desks were open until extra late in the evening. Well, why don't you get over that? It was lacking that Claudia de Breij accompanied the parades musically. The choice of persecution has also proved to be clearly political. The PvdA politicians of any stature Spekman and Samsom have escaped the dance. While Wilders merely demographically expressed a wish, \"less, less,\" \"more, more,\" it was Mr Spekman who said that you should humiliate Moroccans, because that would be the only thing that helps in that particular, Moroccan, environment. Mr. Samsom made it even furier. He said that the Moroccans by their genes, their genetic build-up, are simply destined to end up higher on the crime ladder. That's a big deal. Those are really racist insulting remarks. That's a lot different than \"more, more\" and \"less, less.\" This is why I would remind you that the Ministry of Justice has indeed acted as a driving force in this prosecution. That M.O. didn't come out. This has not come out in the way of spontaneous transparency. RTL documents were responsible for this. What happened from the Ministry? That's for sure now. It's just... it's just... it's just... it's If you now look back on that ongoing process from the point of view of the situation, you have to include this. Those documents contain a document dated 16 September 2014. In it, ministry officials discuss the conduct of the process. They're discussing the possible defense defense defense defense defenses. Then one official says to another: I will pass on the points you mention to the colleague of the prosecution. Straight from the Ministry to the D.A.'s office. Then Minister Opstelten receives a notice of office from the D.A. which also mentions the names Spekman and Samsom. For they already see the mood hanging: if Samsom or Spekman is called from the side of the defense, that is not pleasant. In that draft notice from the D.A.'s office, those names do appear. And then what happens? Those names are brushed away after consultation of Bolhaar and an official of the Ministry. The official doesn't think it's useful to leave it in there, because that's what the defense is up to. Well, what else do you want? Then it goes on with ministry officials e-mailing each other. And what do they say? They say they'd like to see the officer's requisition in the Wilders trial in advance. They'd like it in advance. Because, they say, \"then you and X can\" \"that will also be an official; you don't know \"fleetmen and where useful comments pass\" to the state attorney, of course. How do you want it? I know the trial's still going on. The judge can do anything with it. But what I would be so happy about is if this minister, with this information, with which he can work, and with the understanding that he can obtain this data, could come to the understanding that it can no longer be done and that he must do something about it. I'll make an appeal to the Minister. He's got clean hands. He has nothing to do with this conspiracy, to put it that way. They're his predecessors. He can be dragged into it if there is a lot to cover up again.You never know that and then he has become responsible. But with the conspiracy I'm talking about, this minister has nothing to do with it. I'd say brush away this shame stain. This persecution does not serve any purpose, is totally inappropriate. So what can the Minister do? That's the question. Now to the D.A., to his D.A., to the attorney general in question, say, \"Stop this. Pray your own inadmissibility. Then we will see what the judge does with it, but at least an act of satisfaction has been made from this government: the matter as it was at the time does not deserve a beauty prize.\""}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-11-20-tweedekamer-8.u285", "speech text": "That's why I also said \"generalizing\" and \"without the good ones.\" I know a lot of good Chinese too. Those are decent people, and they will never mistreat an animal or a human being. But that's not the point. We're not here to compliment you. We're here to take care of the bastards. If I have to compliment myself, hundreds of hours of speaking time are not enough. It's about the bastards. Often that is a minority, but they do need to be dealt with. I want the Secretary of State to send a signal from her department, too. You shouldn't always throw everything off at the State Department. Trade missions are being carried out and this Secretary of State is also involved. That's where it has to be said: boys, cut it out. I say that as an animal ambassador. It's awful how they deal with animals there. That's too scandalous for words. You don't treat the biggest criminal like that, let alone a defenseless animal. It's unlikely you can do that at all. But I want those signals sent out."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-11-21-tweedekamer-11.u103", "speech text": "They weren't old; they were young. And as a group of hyenas, they went off on a defenseless victim. Terrible images. I don't want to wait for a debate. We'll have the Justice and Security budget after this. We too have a lot of questions about this. I would really like to have the debate today. So no support for a separate debate, because we are going to talk about it in half an hour."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-11-21-tweedekamer-12.u118", "speech text": "Then there's a question. The minister praises cybersecurity. I think this is justified. The Dutch cybersecurity is so celebrated that I only read in a book that the Dutch simply manage to watch daily with a security camera from one of the most secure locations of the Russian secret service. Chapeau before that. Of course, cybersecurity must not become a political cover in order to stop talking about terrorism here in the Chamber during the budgetary procedure, because that is what we have now achieved with the handfulness of the Minister. That's why I'm asking. The first line of defence is always: it's individual cases. The second line of defense is that it's under the judge. So the third is: the cover-up under cyber security. This is done in order not to talk about terrorism, the terror and the jihad that flood us. Isn't the fact that the day before yesterday, those two people should be called Dutch? Women with two children have arrived in the Netherlands. They were put on a plane by Erdogan, escorted by the police and ended up here. This cabinet continues to exacerbate the terrorist threat and threatens the security of the Netherlands. I made this clear in my first term and explained it clearly. Why doesn't the Minister send these women back to Erdogan and ensure that none of these collaborators get into the Netherlands anymore? That is the question that bothers the Netherlands when it comes to safety. Cyber security is fine, but it's about the next question. Why does the Minister allow people on Dutch soil, sent by Erdogan, to destroy security here?"}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-11-21-tweedekamer-12.u496", "speech text": "Mr. Chairman. Normally, you thank the Minister for answering the questions, but I'm not gonna do that. The Minister began with a long introduction in which the subject of bullying was raised rather than the repeated cry of the four police unions this morning. Then the minister turned around to say that he had spoken with the chief of police, the unions and the mayors, suggesting that they agree with his policy and denying that they are faced with a fact: the limited police capacity. Then came the defense I'm not going over that, but then come up with a separate team, which even demands, following the murder of attorney Wiersum. The bottom line was hiding behind the budgetary rules. For the first time, as a Chamber, we heard the demand for structural money for the police as an answer that this can only be done in the spring. Mr. Chairman. I thought it was shocking. Such a minister would give you a week's work at Bureau Burgwallen, but without support and without knowing whether your colleague is still here tomorrow, or whether he or she has succumbed under the pressure of work and is sick at home. Or as an agent told me: \"I'm on more than 300 leave hours, but I already know that I can't take leave on Christmas and the New Year's Eve. By 2020, all engagements were withdrawn because of the many events, including the song festival. Mr. Chairman. Who can or wants to work like this? Cops never give up, but now they and masse say they're down below crepe strength. Not through the ice, but under the crepe strength. The absenteeism is unprecedented. That is what we, the politicians, are responsible for. We have to solve that, too. As long as my party doesn't have 76 seats, I have to appeal to the Minister for that. That's what I did with the question: what tasks are going to be taken off? Answer: no tasks will go off. I wonder whether the Minister will continue to do so until the union ultimatum expires on 1 January 2020. Mr. Chairman. I asked for structural money for the police. That's not gonna happen, except for 25 million for vice detectives and the Alien Police, Identification and Trafficking. I asked for appreciation for the police officers. In that context, I asked for two things. Firstly, the purchase of long-term PTSS files, which were clear that the agents would no longer return to the workplace. I didn't get an answer to that, except the killer that PTSS is a terrible disease. Secondly, I asked the Minister to bring the police officers under the workings of the Veterans Act, as the much-needed knowledge, skills and expertise are already clearly regulated. I have motivated that extensively, but the answer was unfortunately: \"There is currently no reason to bring police officers under the Veterans' Act. Then my question is: when? In advance of that, I will file the next motion. [[Motion]] [[The Chamber,]] [[heard the debate,]] [[believes that police officers at risk for their own lives are ensuring safety in the Netherlands, with their work becoming increasingly difficult due to the increasing social threat and workload;]] [[considers that they are entitled to comparable care and rights as laid down for the military in the Veterans Act;]] [[calls on the Government to amend the Veterans Act in such a way that police officers are also covered by that Act,]] [[and goes to the order of the day.]] [[This motion has been proposed by Mr Helder. It seems to me that their submission is sufficiently supported.]] [[She's getting No. kst-35300-VI-26]]"}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-11-26-tweedekamer-24.u209", "speech text": "Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It is good to take stock after two years of Rutte III. Also with this minister, because this minister, together with the coalition parties and the Chamber, has, of course, had some challenges and also set some priorities when it comes to tackling the root causes of migration. This Minister, with the support of the coalition, has freed up a great many millions more. The Minister also pays a great deal of attention to fair trade. Admittedly, the policy has been pursued by the previous Minister for Development Cooperation with her covenant policy, but this Minister has done it well. Progress has been made on the issue of these covenants. The third point that this Minister is paying attention to is to stand up for girls and women. I can only summarize it; she can, of course, put it much better herself. Mr. Chairman. Those three spearheads have always embraced my party. It's not for nothing that they also come from the coalition agreement. I will therefore focus on these three points. I shall begin by saying that development cooperation with trade has perhaps never been so important. We are dealing with the gap between rich and poor, as Mrs Van den Hul pointed out. We're dealing with connections between continents. People no longer needlessly wait for what their future looks like, but take steps to see if they can work on a better future, triggering migration. All this shows the need to better support people in the region themselves and to work fully on the trade agenda. Mr. Chairman. The policy paper is also called Investing in Perspectives for a reason. It is therefore also good to look not only at how we can control migration to Europe, but also at how we can offer people prospects, especially the prospect of a decent life. That is why we need that help and that trade. That is why I will support what my colleagues Kuik and Bouali have said. In addition to the trade agenda, we must also be able to invest in development cooperation, especially at this time. The 0.7 remains the ambition of the Christian Union, and I understand that of the CDA and D66. A resolution on this was adopted at the CDA Congress. We're gonna keep pushing that 0.7 hard. But I also ask the Minister what she could do to take an extra step, for example in the spring note, to make an extra investment for those who need it so badly, as her colleague in the defence sector. Mr. Chairman. Of course, we are not here with this help, because it must also be accompanied by the commitment of our Dutch industry, the business community there. We set up the DGGF a few years ago to see if we could stimulate our business, the business community there. Four years ago, we set up projects for the Addressing Root Causes in the migration countries, the so-called ARC programme. I have a question about that right away. The ARC programme will expire in 2021. What are the Minister's plans after 2021? Is ARC coming back in another form, or are we actually getting the challenge fund for that? I am talking about a challenge fund that also seeks the combination of both business and NGOs and science. This is about how we can tackle the causes of migration in the countries of migration. It is also about how to give young people, in particular, perspective and job opportunities. The CDA and the Christian Union have tabled a motion on how we could possibly give that challenge fund direction. I have the following questions about that. To what extent is this fund really going to reach those migrantable young people? How can we give them perspective and job opportunities, for example through market-relevant training, entrepreneurship training and micro-business? I'd like a response. How attractive will it be for companies to step in, given the obligation to put their own resources in for two thirds? This applies to business and, I believe, to NGOs as well. Isn't that bar a little too high? Of course we are looking for the combination between audience and private, but this seems to me to be a big threshold. When will the Minister provide the first concrete results from the challenge fund in Uganda? It has yet to start, but I am very curious to see what these first developments are like. Then with regard to imvo. We have just discussed it with our colleagues. The IOB recommends that we be informed about the legislative initiatives in other countries in Europe and that we see whether there are legislative pathways too. France is at the forefront of this and in England they are also at the forefront of what we could take on elements of. The aim should not be to undo agreements with industry, but to see if we can come to legislation on soil in relation to business, a kind of level playing field. How does the Minister see this IOB advice when it comes to making legislation complementary to the covenants for corporate social responsibility? I'd like to hear her response on that point. Mr. Chairman. I come to the most vulnerable. I shall be the first to mention the refugees. The flow of refugees and the number of refugees over 70 million people have never been so high. It hurts me that we have EUR 70 million, and I believe that Mrs Van den Hul has already mentioned this, going to EUR 60 million for the Dutch Relief Alliance, the collaboration of Dutch organisations working for emergency aid and for refugees. Does the Minister see any chance of adding to that amount of 70 million, which was already exhausted three weeks ago? Mr. Chairman. When it comes to child prostitution, my heart breaks. I think sexual abuse is the worst thing that can happen to a child. When it comes to how and in what form I am not going to mention the examples of this, these defenseless children are the victims of sometimes even their own father and mother, who sell them to brothels and bets for webcam sex, they can't get worse. 3 million children suffer from this every year. I would urge the Minister to press ahead with the most successful programme to date, Down to Zero, which was launched four years ago, so as not to undermine the results that have now been achieved in these vulnerable children and to ensure that they are followed up. I'm considering a motion on that point. Mr. Chairman. Then when it comes to the most vulnerable: the refugees. I already mentioned them. I'm thinking about Lesbos again. We have once again seen the images of the appalling situation there and we have seen how new plans are on the way to transform the shelter camps into closed camps. What influence will that have on people's living conditions? Winter's coming. We have previously adopted a motion, namely the Groothuizen/Voordewind motion, to see what we can do. I know the standard answers that Brussels has already given enough money and that it is mainly stuck in Athens, but what can this Minister do to carry out that motion and to do something for the winter programme for these people? Mr. Chairman. Then there are two or three small elements, because I see that my time is fast. The terrorist bonus. I am pleased that the Minister is carrying out the motion tabled last year by Mr Van Haga and myself. However, I would ask her to press on with other European countries if they would take the same step as the Netherlands to ensure that there really is a push from Europe towards the Palestinian Authority to stop doing so. Mr. Chairman. Finally, the reconciliation projects. Is the Minister prepared to continue to develop the peace of the bottom up of these successful reconciliation projects? The coalition agreement also points to this. That's it, Mr. Chairman. Thank you."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-11-27-tweedekamer-10.u8", "speech text": "I see that the coalition, through the VVD colleague, has prepared the defense well. There is now a reference to the fact that research has been carried out and that this has been shared with the Chamber. Yeah, we're aware of that. But I'm referring to something completely different. This information came a long way after the decision was taken to extend this mission. This was about the outcome of the D.A.'s investigation. I'm talking about information that was available to the Cabinet about 70 to 170 deaths that would have occurred in Hawija daily before this mission was extended. That's when we were here at the Interrupt Microphone? No, we weren't here then, because we didn't have that information."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-11-27-tweedekamer-10.u40", "speech text": "Thank you, Mr President. \"So that we will never forget\": it stands on numerous Dutch war monuments and it is the motto of countless commemorations of the horrors of war. War is always horrible: for the people who are sent by government and cabinet to do difficult and traumatic work in which their own lives are at stake, and for the people who can become victims of it. For civilian casualties, too. But \"so that we will never forget\" does not seem to apply to the Prime Minister. Try to imagine, visualize it. The minister's predecessor informs the Prime Minister in a \"non-alarming tone\" of the possibility of civilian deaths in a bombing by the Dutch F-16 on Hawija. So \"non-alarming\" that it goes in one ear and out the other ear. Foreign media talked about dozens of civilian deaths, but the Foreign Ministers and the Prime Minister were apparently not interested in an area where the Netherlands flew fighters. Without context, the message might have been easier to digest, because the truth is always the first victim in a war. There are things we shouldn't forget. One day after the attack on an IS bomb factory, foreign media reported dozens of victims. The U.S. Supreme Command found it \"believable\" that civilian casualties had occurred. But the reality of the Hague was that the minister of defense's predecessor in the debate with the House of Representatives said that \"we had to establish that there was no collateral damage,\" and that the Prime Minister was informed by former Minister Hennis, but \"not alarming.\" In which universe is hearing the word \"citizens\" in relation to your own mission, which you have tried to sell in this Chamber as necessary and necessary to protect citizens \"non-alarming,\" I ask the Prime Minister. I ask the VVD, who, in the previous debate, wondered out loud how well the political antenna was tuned to the Ministry of Defence, how well the political antenna of her own Prime Minister is set, if you do not take the opportunity of civilian deaths as a result of a mission that you yourself have proposed and commissioned. Mr. Chairman. Another truth we should not forget is that the bombing has left a ruin. Dozens of people have been killed or lost everything: their family, their home and their stuff. In The Hague it is called: no procedural mistakes have been made. And so neither the D.A. saw any reason to start a follow-up investigation. Apparently, the right button was pressed at the right time: a bombardment by the book. However, this does not relieve the cabinet of the obligation to start independent research. Why didn't that happen right away, and why still not? Mr. Chairman. Another painful truth we must not forget is that people have been injured. A man is wounded in the bombing of Hawija. His house and shop are being destroyed. He now lives in the Netherlands with his son, who became half blind during the attack, but his old house is still in ruins. The reality of the Hague is that, to this day, no penny has been paid to the victims and no immediate thought has been given to whether or not a bell has ringed, that if we are responsible for this, we must get the hell out of our way to help these people. Mr. Chairman. The events surrounding this bombing mainly show that the cabinet has lived in its own reality. There is no excuse for not fully informing the Chamber and there is no excuse for not compensating the victims and not conducting an investigation. Only after the press has gotten this case out, the Secretary of Defense is starting to think about compensation. It's too late. \"So that we will never forget\" seems to have become a motto for this cabinet that means \"we never want to take any real responsibility.\" As far as the Party for Animals is concerned, there is no excuse for that."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-11-27-tweedekamer-10.u547", "speech text": "No, no, no, no, no. I'm not getting everything mixed up here. This is about one and the same case. The Prime Minister can't take no for an answer, but this is about the attack on Hawija. This is about the civilian casualties that fell there. Subsequently, there have been various forms of involvement of directors. Coincidentally, all those rulers have no memory of what happened there. This is a line of defense. This might just save you today and keep the support of the coalition and perhaps even part of the opposition. But it's not credible. I'll stick with that."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-11-28-tweedekamer-10.u130", "speech text": "That standard defense line of \"shaving people in one place\" doesn't cover the load and doesn't work anymore. That's not the point. What matters is that all those people who experience insecurity, who experience insecurity as a result of mass immigration and thus diversity. I said last week in the WHO that it is not SGP young people who practice pool terror. We know where they came from. We know what the backgrounds are. We also know from prison psychology, from Mr Sennels from Copenhagen, that this has a link with Islamic education. We see in Gorinchem where that leads. I am not saying that all Turkish people in Gorinchem are bad, but I am saying that the concentration is not good, that it is too much for the Dutch and that there is racist violence towards native Dutch people as a result of the diversity policy and its promotion. That's a fact of life. That's the fact of life. The Minister says that we want to conduct policies and deal with them well. Then I say: protect our leitkultur, said in Dutch, and talk to the victim of the week. But then I don't hear the Minister. No, but if there's anything else going on, he's first in the mosque."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-12-02-eerstekamer-3.u104", "speech text": "Your question was why we chose this as a defense at all. In return, I indicated why we decided in 2012 that Nieuw-Miligen is not really a suitable location. That really had to do with radar coverage. What then happened in the process is that the energy agreement was added in the course of the previous cabinet. Then, per province, we looked at where we can make windmills on land and at sea; although the discussion per province was mainly about windmills on land. This argument was also relevant. If the radar were to remain in New Mills, the wind farms in Flevoland would no longer be able to operate because of the disruption of the radar. Speaking of Defense, that's what I'm standing for and what you've been asking me about. This was the primary reason and reason. In addition, all the plans in the last period of time have, of course, become an explicit argument, because we now have to take this into account. Plans and agreements have been made with Flevoland and there is now a lot of work to be done to implement them. This is also a fact now. Only that wasn't the primary reason to say: we're leaving New Mills. I think it is important to emphasise that. That was added later to the Energy Agreement. Mr. Ganzevoort asked why the search area is so small. So that has something to do with the deed. It's still happening now. It's all calculated. It really works through a funnel. We have first established the policy frameworks and then we will continue to calculate them. I have just indicated to you that high-rise buildings, windmills and such like can have a disruptive effect. It's always about calculating whether it's acceptable, yes or no. That is always the balance that is being made. Mr Koole asked for Zeeland and Mr Ganzevoort asked for Limburg. It is not possible to fully cover the Netherlands with two radars. You have to go 400 kilometers up and 180 kilometers above the North Sea. If you would like to cover the Netherlands completely, you should have a few more radars. In view of the fact that we are having this discussion, I do not have the idea that the Netherlands can't wait if I come up with the request to place some more radars. That means we have to take care of it differently. At high altitude we have cover, but the vulnerability remains in those areas that you yourself have seen. That is where we are more vulnerable, and we are trying with our neighbouring countries to give substance to Belgium and Germany. But in that we depend on their cooperation. If they say \"we don't feel like it for a while and turn off our own radar,\" then we have to deal with it."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-12-03-eerstekamer-3.u67", "speech text": "Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you also for the contribution to the second term. This time, in view of the confusion last night, I will also pronounce Mrs Teunissen's name correctly. I see that Mr Nicola\u00ef is here. It does indicate how well the Group of the Party of Animals is working together, if everyone can be spokesperson on this dossier. Perhaps it is right to point out that in your contributions, both last night and this morning, you have all indicated how important you think it is to be careful and sound in the investigations that are being carried out. Mr Van Dijk spoke about guarantees, Mr Koole asked for them again, as did Mr Ganzevoort. Actually, you all said that's important. I believe that the discussion last night focused on the need for the national coordination system. I thought Mr Rietkerk put it well in relation to the Spatial Planning Act. The question now before the First Chamber is whether, on the basis of an appeal to the national interest, I may declare the national coordination system applicable. I've reported to you why that is. Mr Van Dijk asked how it could have come to this. About the state of defense and about what it takes to get the DOD back in order, we can set up a whole tree with each other; I think we'll still be at it tonight. But that is why we call on the state coordination scheme, also because the municipality of West Betuwe has indicated that we no longer want to start a zoning procedure. The question remains as to whether, as a cabinet, we still believe that Herwijnen is the right location. We have replied yes to that, and that is why we have set up the national coordination system. There are concerns. The municipality of West Betuwe has written me a clear letter containing two concerns, namely health and cumulative effects, and research into alternatives. Mrs Moonen asked for a reflection on this. I think we treated this with each other last night, too. I have indicated to you that some things in the process could have been better. Why not investigate alternatives directly on 1 January? This also has to do with the reclassification of the municipality. You can all form your opinion on this afterwards, but sometimes things run the way they do. The meeting with the municipality of Lingewaal was held in December last year. Then it was time for a new municipal board to form a college and the like. It took a while. But there was also some delay on our part. I agree with you that it might have been possible to do so more quickly. Then I will deal with the specific questions that have been asked. Mr Dessing was clear about the conditions set by the Forum for Democracy Group, including sound and careful investigations. Mr Janssen expressed his opinion on this matter on behalf of the SP Group. He specifically asked what TNO takes into account. We talked about that last night. In principle, TNO validated the first Thale report in 2012. You can also find that online. Following his own radar on his own site in Hengelo, Thales has again made measurements to see if the manufacturing data corresponds to the practice. The latest data will be used. Mr Koole or anyone else, I believe Mr Dessing asked yesterday whether the measurement data in Wier could be included. Not at the moment, because the radar station in Wier still has to be built. Also in Herwijnen, when the radar is placed there, measurements will be made to see if the radiation meets the existing standards. If there are new data from the Thale report that can be validated by TNO, then of course I will also look into it. You have found Thales' latest validation this year. TNO will involve them in the investigation of cumulative effects."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-12-03-tweedekamer-58.u114", "speech text": "I think that's an excellent suggestion. So I'd like to take it with me. I am going to make it even more beautiful: I would also like to say to Mr Bruins and to all the Members who have asked questions on this subject that, of course, this also lends itself to an evaluation. This is also terra incognita. We must therefore look back at some point and see what has happened on this particular and sensitive subject. Mr. Chairman. Mr Ronnes asked if I would be prepared to make clear what registers exist and what information is collected in them. I'd be happy to. Moreover, in all new sources of information, the starting point is that the different interests are well balanced, and I would like to stress once again the privacy aspects. Then Mr Ronnes asked how long the remark \"in research\" will remain in the register when a return notification is made. That depends a little on the nature of the callback. This includes, for example, whether additional information should be requested. But a simple feedback can of course also be processed very quickly. Mr. Chairman. Mr Alkaya asked whether there was also a duty for tax advisers and what is the situation. Tax advisors are also Wwft institutions. In this context, they are obliged to conduct customer research and also to establish the UBO. This also means that they are obliged to report back if they discover discrepancies. Mr Alkaya also asked whether the 25% limit should not be lowered. That question was actually somewhat along the lines of what Mr Nijboer said. My first line of defense would be next. We have now applied this 25% limit in all the Member States. That also makes sense from an international point of view. But I understand the questioners quite frankly, because I am also afraid of cutting on such a subject. So I would like to stick to that border now, but I would like to agree with the Chamber right now that we will take this right away in the evaluation or, if we have signals earlier that there will be a cut, we will follow Mr Alkaya's suggestion and Mr Nijboer's suggestion and then we will simply make an adjustment. Because I think they are quite right to say: this is one of those cat-and-mouse possibilities that you may have to close up again."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-12-03-tweedekamer-59.u114", "speech text": "I think that's an excellent suggestion. So I'd like to take it with me. I am going to make it even more beautiful: I would also like to say to Mr Bruins and to all the Members who have asked questions on this subject that, of course, this also lends itself to an evaluation. This is also terra incognita. We must therefore look back at some point and see what has happened on this particular and sensitive subject. Mr. Chairman. Mr Ronnes asked if I would be prepared to make clear what registers exist and what information is collected in them. I'd be happy to. Moreover, in all new sources of information, the starting point is that the different interests are well balanced, and I would like to stress once again the privacy aspects. Then Mr Ronnes asked how long the remark \"in research\" will remain in the register when a return notification is made. That depends a little on the nature of the callback. This includes, for example, whether additional information should be requested. But a simple feedback can of course also be processed very quickly. Mr. Chairman. Mr Alkaya asked whether there was also a duty for tax advisers and what is the situation. Tax advisors are also Wwft institutions. In this context, they are obliged to conduct customer research and also to establish the UBO. This also means that they are obliged to report back if they discover discrepancies. Mr Alkaya also asked whether the 25% limit should not be lowered. That question was actually somewhat along the lines of what Mr Nijboer said. My first line of defense would be next. We have now applied this 25% limit in all the Member States. That also makes sense from an international point of view. But I understand the questioners quite frankly, because I am also afraid of cutting on such a subject. So I would like to stick to that border now, but I would like to agree with the Chamber right now that we will take this right away in the evaluation or, if we have signals earlier that there will be a cut, we will follow Mr Alkaya's suggestion and Mr Nijboer's suggestion and then we will simply make an adjustment. Because I think they are quite right to say: this is one of those cat-and-mouse possibilities that you may have to close up again."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-12-04-tweedekamer-3.u144", "speech text": "Thank you, Mr President. Lives have been ruined, destroyed, without explanation. Without a fair chance of defense, childcare allowances were suddenly discontinued and recovered up to years. Parents were thrown into deep misery. On average, they had to repay thousands of euros, but also tens of thousands of euros. I talked to a lot of duped this morning. They are also sitting in the gallery today. Someone even had to pay back over a ton. That's inhumane. They were labeled and labeled as fraud without being able to defend themselves properly and provide evidence of their innocence. These parents were all these years, until today, completely without a chance against the powerful Tax Administration. Their salary has been and is being taken away today, it is being seized, jobs have been cancelled, houses have been emptied, marriages and relationships have been disrupted. Children who suffer terribly from their parents' stress and financial problems, no holidays, no presents, sometimes no food. From a small point of view, they know nothing but that there is poverty in the family, shame, distress. No money to go to the hospital. I spoke to a mother this morning, a gentle woman who was in tears. A lot of MPs didn't keep it dry and I certainly didn't. She's a kidney patient, waiting for a donor kidney. She had to cancel the appointment because she didn't have the money to go to the hospital. A strong woman, fighting to get her life back, fighting for her child. But no matter how hard people fight, IRS seems to be omnipotent. The IRS decides on people's lives. People's lives that stand still for years. People have completely lost confidence in government, politics and, in some cases, even in people in general, because of officials and this Secretary of State. What's it supposed to feel like if you're being thrown away by a government agency as a fraud, but you don't know why? That you have to prove your own innocence and drag the government back to see how you struggle? That you are being ethnically profiled, is the presumption, because the gut feeling of politics has its impact on the humanity of the civil servants? Institutional bias. Strict, tighter, tighter. Mr. Chairman. As Mr Omtzigt, Mrs Leijten and Mr Azarkan, passionate colleagues have been pulling everything out of the box for years. They show true representatives of the people. A lot of respect for that. I therefore wholeheartedly support their argument. I am not here as a financial expert, I am not a member of the Finance Committee, but I am here as a Member of Parliament, representing all the people who are watching this debate today and wondering whether there is still a sense of responsibility. Last week the news came out that a coalition partner wants to investigate the possibilities of a criminal investigation. A parliamentary interrogation is also suggested. I will wholeheartedly support all the initiatives in this direction, because all these people deserve, in addition to excuses and generous compensation, real justice at last. Thank you, Mr President."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-12-04-tweedekamer-6.u337", "speech text": "Quite a bit happened earlier, Mr. Chairman. The Secretary of State thought he'd come up with a solution: you can call the Tax Phone. Those parents have been doing that for three weeks for their file. They started laughing like hell. The Secretary of State didn't even realize what was happening. The gap between policies, intentions, and what is felt, was visible and palpable here. It was embarrassing. Mr. Chairman. We are talking about a government that, for years, wrongly gives people the stamp \"frauder,\" which leaves people in bitter misery for years and does not protect people, but makes them defenseless. We're not talking about a commercial company that wants to make a profit; no, we're talking about a government. This is enough to assume political responsibility. There has been political failure in recent years. There have been several times when it has been found to be disproportionate, but no political steps have been taken. Much suffering could have been avoided. Today, in the debate, it appeared that there had been a solution earlier if the Secretary of State had asked in September last year or in March this year when he answered Mr Omtzigt's questions and wanted to know what had happened. Today I still do not have sufficient information on the size of the families affected. I have no idea today of the solution to carry out the controlling task I have and to assess whether what the Secretary of State is proposing is enough and meets the great injustice that is taking place here. Mr. Chairman. The worst thing I think is that I had begun to think that this important day was not used for a solution for the people who sit here and follow it at home. Which means there's nothing I can do but file the next motion. [[Motion]] [[The Chamber,]] [[heard the debate,]] [[declares confidence in the Secretary of State,]] [[and goes to the order of the day.]] [[This motion was tabled by Mr Leijten, Mr Azarkan and Mr Van Kooten-Arissen. It seems to me that their submission is sufficiently supported.]] [[She's getting No. kst-31066-553]]"}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-12-10-tweedekamer-32.u185", "speech text": "D66 gives the Prime Minister an inadequate policy today and also says that he has a stupid strategy, especially on how much modernisation you are achieving. My question to the Prime Minister would be: is this, in his view, sufficient modernisation? Then you can say that it is a general view of D66, but it was not a general view; it was a view in this debate. If there's no better defense, I'm inclined to think D66's right. If this is the whole ambition, then that budget will be... Yes, there is modernisation in the Finnish proposal, but we want more from the Netherlands, don't we?"}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-12-12-tweedekamer-17.u46", "speech text": "In defense of the Minister. One of my amendments is on this subject, so I can also imagine that it will be dealt with."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-12-16-eerstekamer-5.u3", "speech text": "Thank you, Mr President. I would like to begin by congratulating Mrs Kluit and Mr Van Pareren for their wonderful maiden speeches and, in advance, wishing Mrs Nanninga, who will be making her maiden speech, all the best. Mr. Chairman. Good thing we can still provide input to the defense budget from our home. There is a lack of sense of urgency, both in the cabinet and in the Lower House. As you know, I've been up close with the cuts in Defense over the past three decades. Up close, I've seen the catastrophic effect of it. Unfortunately, in this beautiful house we talk about that very minimally, but the state of Defense is downright lousy. Despite a great deal of internal criticism, there has been uncompromising cuts and, as she herself says, the organization has failed through her hooves. It takes years and years and requires a lot of sacrifices, before this can be restored and the Netherlands takes back its responsibility in the field of security. For decades, there has been roofing on staff, equipment, practice, infrastructure, ICT, logistics and so on. Mr President, I shall be brief. Of course, our NATO partners have not escaped the image of our Defence Organisation. We're regularly reminded of it. In 2008, NATO typified our military as \"an anorexia patient\" and since 2012 the characterization \"paria\" has been used. A rich country that does not fulfil its obligations and neglects its own defence organization: something of that is found, in all kinds of fora, but also within our society. Also within the Defence Department there are also employees who leave early. Despite reasonable recruitment results, there are almost 8,500 vacancies. And this figure is getting up. It's often not the worst that leaves. A few hundred vacancies are filled per military unit by people who have long been retired. The loyalty of those people to the Defense Department is so great that after 30, 40 years they still want to help their parate colleagues. An unspeakable image has emerged of an organization that has to radiate force, youthful enthusiasm and confidence in itself. One of the austerity measures still continuing with the Defence Department is the RVU fine, which has been designated as a pre-pension scheme by the functional retirement from the Military Civil Service Act under pressure from the austerity measures for several years. But it's not. It happened when people involved had no choice at the time. They had to leave and the organization had to pay, and still has to pay, an annual fine. A feeble objection is not enough for the Forum for Democracy, as Defense now does after the Kerstens motion. The Ministry of Finance makes a budget for Defense free by one hand. That amount sounds very tough. But with the other hand simply takes back the money and the fine. Of course, our allies can see that, too. This has to stop. In fact, this has to be repaired in the forthcoming Spring Note and with retroactive effect. The House of Representatives recently discussed this in the budget debate. The Christmas Movement of the PvdA has been held: again neither meat nor fish, or sense of urgency. My group may therefore table a motion for a resolution on this matter in the second term. As a Chamber, let us be absolutely clear about this and say to ourselves: Defence has respected the law and has now adapted the RVU regime. What remains and what remains for us as a Chamber is to repair this injustice about the interim phase with retroactive effect and to do what we promised in Wales. The restitution of this unjustly levied fine will help the Defence Department in particular to resolve the major personnel problems. There are still many cases to be resolved, such as the new pay house and the corresponding allowance system. From this house, we can help the minister, in this case the stasis, in a relatively simple way. There are still many billions on the shelf of overdue infrastructure maintenance, ICT, combat support and many other areas. Finally, Mr President. This puts an end to a needlessly pumping around of money and making it shady about how much money is actually being spent on Defense. Moreover, the Dutch contribution to his own security and that of his allies is increasing. We are all responsible for this. Thank you, Mr President."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-12-16-eerstekamer-5.u5", "speech text": "Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you also to Mr Beuker, who also speaks from his previous position from a close commitment. I don't think you're the only one in this room who knows an involvement in Defense, whether it's because of a direct job in the past or because of friends or family working for Defense. In addition, you will see people here on a daily basis who will ensure that you can do your job safely here. We do this 24/7, every day of the year, not only in the Netherlands but everywhere in the world. I fully endorse the appreciation you have just expressed for the military. You're right to point out that Defense has to come a long way and that over the last few years, it's been cut down a lot. I think I can speak on behalf of the entire Defence Organization. But we also see that with the start of this cabinet, the first prospects have also emerged, by investing extra money. The Minister and I always say that the 1.5 billion is a good first step, but it is not enough yet. Fortunately, we have been given extra structural money in the Spring paper. We continue to work to ensure that Defense grows to the agreements we have made, especially from the perspective that the organization so needs it, and not because someone else says it. It is about the real estate, so that the army buildings are in order, about the combat suits or the necessary equipment, but also about the renewal of personnel policy. We now have a wage building dating from 1917. A state committee set that up at the time. He said, the older you get, the more expenses you have, so you earn more salary. That no longer fits in with the principles that we now know and what generations want, namely that you are rewarded for what you do and for the responsibilities you have. We are therefore facing a major challenge. Mr. Chairman. I have some doubts about what Mr Beuker has just said. Mr Beuker argued that we should focus on an adaptation of the Wage Tax Act, because applying the RVU tax is a tax measure. I think you spoke with my colleague, the Secretary of State for Finance, this morning. This is about who it applies to. I don't recognize that there's no urgency in the House of Representatives. Not only Mr Kerstens, but also former CDA member Mrs Bruins Slot and Mr Bosman have tabled a motion on the RVU levy. It was just adopted by the Chamber, too. Unfortunately, last week, the tax inspector gave me the decision on objections. It's been rejected. This means that the tax authorities say that this is indeed covered by early retirement. You saw that I didn't object for nothing. I'm going to see what the tax inspector's verdict is and consider what this means. I'm gonna see what follow-up steps are still possible. I recognize what Mr Beuker said, that more is needed for the defense. I have also indicated to you that this cabinet is investing extra and that we are continuing our efforts to ensure that the defense is put in order. But that will go in steps. We cannot do that at once, but we are preparing for the next steps to improve everything that needs to be done within the Defense Department. That's pretty big."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-12-16-eerstekamer-5.u8", "speech text": "It's not a defense bill. That's what I told you. It's the Pay Tax Act. You just discussed it here in your room. It is a consequence of social affairs legislation. We in the Defence Department have indicated that the legislation on military matters is still from the 1960s. At that time, the legislator indicated that military workers were obliged to retire earlier because of the exercise of their duties. We have also submitted this to the tax inspector, to see what that means. It has now returned something to us and indicates that it does not agree with our reasoning. I've just informed you that I'm going to think about that. What does this mean? What steps can the Department of Defense possibly take? But if you want the legislation to be amended, I would like to call on you to have this discussion together with the colleagues in the Finance and Social Affairs Committee, because that is what the legislation, the RVU tax, is based on."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-12-18-tweedekamer-16.u122", "speech text": "When you hear the minister, it looks like I've been chanting for more defense expenses. My question was a different one after all. It seems that there are occasional resources going to the Defense Department and that they are being used for structural matters, such as software licences and the replenishment of stocks. On the contrary, I would like to avoid the occasional increase in money being made to Defence because it is now being used to undertake multiannual commitments. I ask the Minister if he agrees with me."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2019-12-19-tweedekamer-44.u10", "speech text": "I'm not going to hold the motion because the motion calls for an investigation. It may well be that the Minister is going to consult with his colleague in the defense and that he says \"it can't be\" with the arguments that the VVD just mentioned. But everyone is calling for solutions to be devised to solve the problem in the police. Then this is also a solution that needs to be looked at. If it turns out it can't, I'll be the last to want something that can't. But it's a research motion. The second motion has to do with fireworks. [[Motion]] [[The Chamber,]] [[heard the debate,]] [[Whereas, in accordance with the criminal procedure directives of the Office, the possession of a firearm is punishable by imprisonment, but the possession of one or more shells or cobras is subject to community service;]] [[Considering that heavy-duty fireworks are life-threatening and justifies the arrest of suspects, but that the current Directive constitutes a barrier to this;]] [[calls on the Government to enter into talks with the Public Prosecutor with a view to adapting the Fireworks Directive in such a way that it does not prevent the application of pre-trial detention so that the owners of heavy illegal fireworks can be detained at the end of the year,]] [[and goes to the order of the day.]] [[This motion has been proposed by Mr Van Dam. It seems to me that their submission is sufficiently supported.]] [[She's getting No. kst-29628-924]]"}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-01-16-tweedekamer-10.u50", "speech text": "Maybe I'm wrong, but the SGP is in favour of that 2% standard for defense, isn't it? We have to stick to that NATO standard, right? Or am I wrong?"}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-01-16-tweedekamer-10.u52", "speech text": "I just want to say that I think it's weird. When professionals, patient organisations and health insurance companies determine what a good quality of care is and roll out a certain amount of money, Mr Van der Staaij finds that difficult. But the SGP is in favour of saying that 2% of our gross domestic product is going to Defense. If our gross domestic product goes up by 100 billion next year because we've made something brilliant up, there's gonna be a huge extra amount in the defense, when we still have no idea how we're gonna spend it. If you are talking about random money throwing, then of course such a standard is far more unwise than a sensible standard for the quality of care, I would say."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-01-16-tweedekamer-10.u53", "speech text": "But the comparison does not mean that it is a political weighting or that you keep to the agreements you have made with each other. It's another political weighting. You can always say: that's good, but we have a good story to do differently. We have indeed said to each other that there are certain quality calculations behind it. What do you need for a defense? \"Well, this would be a good release.\" In that sense, I am not arguing for it, but it does give me an idea. The same applies, of course, to development cooperation. We have certain agreements on this. So it's fine that we make this kind of deal, but we have to realize that it has consequences, because you can only spend that money once."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-01-21-tweedekamer-26.u4", "speech text": "Mr. Chairman. There were tears yesterday in Rijswijk. Of course there are tears. If you are thrown into misery for years and you do not know what you have done, it is not explained to you and you lose the ground under your feet: of course there are tears. Especially if it turns out it wasn't right. Where the government has to protect, this was a government that committed a crime against its own defenseless parents. The Prime Minister also had tears, but his hands were empty. I really don't think I can accept that. Lift the statute of limitations! There are already several parents who have been told that they didn't cheat, but now they can't get their money back because it would be a statute of limitations. Bullshit. You have the power, I say to the Prime Minister, to lift that limitation period. Then you're not gonna hide behind some advisory committee. Just take care of it today! And especially those complicated things, because they are there, I will admit that. Just give the people who report and about which there is no fraud report, but still a lot to be sorted out, an advance. Give them air, so they can organize a children's party for their children, go on vacation or just get a normal haircut. Mr. Chairman. On 15 November the General Administrative Service was asked to give an opinion. It was there in two months. And two days later, the one who wrote that advice was already appointed.......................................................................................................................................................................................... If you can do that that fast, you can do it fast for those parents, too. And I'd like to help. I've already handed over 500 reports from my hotline to the Ministry. What are you doing with that, I would like to ask the Minister of Finance. I've got another 800 here. It's all yours. I can't add them to the meeting because it still contains personal data. They've been in since November 11th. The Ministry can have them, because these people want a solution. In the red folder, Minister of Finance, are people who see their surcharges settled, who have still been paid wages and someone who has to sell his house before 1 March, because he is in trouble because of surcharges. So it's still the most important thing. Then there are the 330 pages of consultancy proza that we received Friday night and last night. Is this it? Is this serious? That's what I'm asking the Minister of Finance and the Prime Minister. In 2017, breastlap said to us: listen to the people who do the work. We were promised a personnel monitor. I've never seen it. The Temporary Committee on Integrity Tax Administration screams in every six months' advice they give within the Tax Administration louder and harder: it is not safe within the service. The people who do the work are not heard. They have solutions, they see problems, but they are not seen. Yeah, well, that General Administration has spoken to location directors again and to the top again. But not with the people who it's about. Go talk to those people on the tax phone, to those tax inspectors, to those tax bailiffs who have to make the recovery. They know where the leak is and they know what the solution is. No more consultancy proza. They all say to me: carry it out. Put down eight DGs and ten Secretary of State. If you do this, they'll all be gone in a year and the leak won't be upstairs. For 12 years, we've seen the consultants walk in and run away, we see top executives come and go, we see Secretary of State die, but it's not the solution. Listen to the people who do it. Mr. Chairman. And one more thing. Today, one of the people who got justice this summer that she was not a fraud and that she would get her file, received a message. You remember the importance of these files on this subject. I started that hotline. Today she received a delicious e-mail from the national attorney that the appeal will be continued. We're putting together files for these parents, but the state attorney's gonna sue us all for a while. I do not see any new policy. Can the Minister explain this to me?"}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-01-21-tweedekamer-26.u377", "speech text": "Sure. I would very much like to agree with that. To be honest, however, this applies to everything else that we decide to do in the area of depilation. Let me say this, too. I've seen dozens of reorganisations in earlier stages of my life and the most important thing I've got left of the classic reorganisation is this: if it's not really necessary, you shouldn't do it, because it's a huge waste of time. We're gonna do something here that's also essentially different. We're looking for a broadening of the bottle neck, politically and highly-officially. Next, I think we can all see that Customs is really something other than Supplements and the Tax Office. In addition, we see that, at the end of the day, we want to move towards a new system with each other. I think this is a sensible way to go. Suppose you had waited until in four or five months I would say that in defense of this cabinet plan and one Secretary of State had begun, exactly in line with Menno Snel. Then within the shortest time it would have been exclusively engaged, along with its dg, on the playing field on which Menno Snel was also on. Then 80% to 90% of the time would have been in the process of answering the legitimate questions of the Chamber about what went wrong. And the IRS, the government's coronary artery, had not received sufficient attention."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-01-22-tweedekamer-8.u212", "speech text": "Certainly, Mr. Chairman. I specifically mentioned the road safety effects, because I have heard the broad concern in the Chamber. It's about the whole of all the effects. Questions have been asked about other countries, including Mr Dijkstra: are we the only country without that duty? No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, Indeed, in a number of other countries, inter-group procedures have also been initiated. They are confidential, so we do not know exactly what is the reason for infraction in all those other countries. Mr Wassenberg spoke about fines. If we did not agree to this bill, the intergroup procedure would certainly be continued at some point. I'm just gonna say it very openly here. The only reason why they have not done so yet is that I was able to point to the European Commission: it has already been tabled and is with our Parliament. If it isn't agreed, then they'll take action. That's what they reported. They now see that we have made our efforts. There is a proposal that the European Commission also says: if you do this, you will do and we will be able to withdraw the group. If it is not accepted, it is of course over. Then it's about at least 2.9 million fines, anyway. That's the start. That's what it starts with. And then between \u20ac3,500 and \u20ac211,000 per day as a penalty payment if we don't do it. I do not know exactly where these amounts come from, but that is what the European Commission has determined. So there is no fine yet, but I really want to avoid that. I think that is also possible, because we now have a proposal that can count on broad support. It's not just a burden increase. Of course, if you have zero costs now and you have to pay later, even if it's only tens, that's a burden increase, especially if you have multiple tractors. I understand that, but otherwise we should also have a registration, which would always involve costs. There are also other advantages in this. I think we have a very well-defenseable overall proposal here. In France, vehicles that go faster than 40 km/h are not allowed. That is why there is a different situation with the obligation to do so. It has also been mentioned by several here that in most countries the obligation already applies. So the Netherlands is the country that is lagging behind with this. How is the central system of exemptions going to work, Mr Dijkstra asks."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-02-04-eerstekamer-6.u84", "speech text": "In fact, Mr Kox cites the system of novelles, which the state committee says is a shortcut and that it is better to formalize it with a return right. I see a lot of that. You can also ask yourself the question I am now asking the government, which is exactly the difference between a novelle through that procedure and the right to return. I would like to hear a more detailed opinion from the government. Mr President, I shall continue with my speech. And I would like to take a moment to consider the constitutional court proposed by the State Commission. The State Committee does not do this instead of the First Chamber but as a complement to the system, because the Council of State is already assessing in the front whether a bill conflicts with, for example, classical fundamental rights. The proposals of the State Committee therefore include a constitutional court, after the legislative process has ended, i.e. when the Lower House, the Upper Chamber and the Government have adopted a legislative proposal. It is a law and then the Constitutional Court can say: you have not done your job properly, we signal an infringement of the law on fundamental rights. This would therefore strengthen the legal position of citizens in the Netherlands and make the Constitution a kind of lively cradle of the democratic rule of law. We in D66 are in favour of introducing a system of ex post constitutional review. Of course, its precise design is a matter of further consideration, but we would like the government to send the promised note on the various variants of constitutional review ex post to the Second and First Chambers in the short term. Speaking of judges, here's the thing. I was no longer allowed to interrupt when Mr Cliteur was speaking, so I now take the opportunity to say that I am uncomfortable with the way in which Forum for Democracy talks about independent judges in the Netherlands. I have the feeling that the criticism of judges, who are not really able to defend themselves because they are merely assessing substantive matters, is attacking a relatively defenseless group in our state system, in the trias politicians. That is why I want to say here that we really believe in the independence of the Dutch judges and that we do not think that they should be attacked in such a way."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-02-04-eerstekamer-6.u86", "speech text": "As far as I am concerned, the debate must be on which laws we have passed that the judge must enforce. If the judge finds that the government does not comply with its own rules, it is precisely the judge's job to say: ho, stop, this is not possible. If you are going to criticize the judge, you are actually at the wrong place. In this case, Forum should say in the Second and First Chambers: we are going to see how that law works and then we are going to start a discussion to amend it. To focus the focus on the independent judge, who is rather defenseless in the trias politician, that goes too far for me."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-02-04-eerstekamer-6.u88", "speech text": "The judge is not relatively defenseless. I saw a piece in the Volkskrant yesterday of a judge referring to a ruling by Hamilton that the judiciary is actually the weakest link. That's what Hamilton said in 1787, but in 1803, the right of review was introduced with Marbury vs Madison. From that moment on, in the United States of America, you have a very lively discussion about all kinds of judgments and whether the judge does not cross his own boundaries. It must be the case here in the First Chamber that we can criticise not only the products of the legislature, but also those of the executive and that we can also discuss those of the judiciary. We also need to be able to assess whether the judiciary complies with the constitutional limits laid down in the Constitution and in Treaty law. The moment we didn't do that, we wouldn't take our job here in the First Chamber seriously."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-02-04-tweedekamer-36.u94", "speech text": "That's a lot of words without a clear answer. The analysis rightly points to the rising costs associated with ageing, care for the elderly, but also the care in general, which is going up to over 100 billion, and the AOW. I find it strange that there is also a mention of defence. I would like to hear a reflection from Mr Amhaouch on that, because I find that rather strange. Then why doesn't it say, for example, the 2.5% that you think is so important? Don't you think that's much more important than assuming on the autopilot that defense charges are increasing?"}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-02-06-tweedekamer-3.u11", "speech text": "I have reflected on this before, already in 2014 and 2015. But let me first go back to Mrs Karabulut's first comment on the Afghanistan Papers. Because I don't know if we've been lied to. Those papers don't tell me that. What these papers show is that American officials publicly said different things than they personally thought about the progress of the mission. But the question is whether this is also apparent from Dutch Parliamentary letters. To be perfectly honest, I wonder if you can blame the Dutch government for reading back all those parliamentary letters about Afghanistan, from Baghlan to Uruzgan until now. But I'll ask the Cabinet because I want to know. I ask this because the final evaluation of the IOB on Kunduz states that there has been too positive reports. This has to do with expectations imposed by this House of Representatives. I am also looking at Mrs Karabulut in that regard. Uruzgan was supposed to be a reconstruction mission, while it wasn't a reconstruction mission. That makes reports impossible to match with reality. That's why diplomats, defense officers and military have to sell things in a way that doesn't match what happened there in that county. This interaction between Chamber and Cabinet has to be different. It has also changed over the past few years. We've learned those lessons. I am convinced of that when I look at how we are shaping the Article 100 process here. But that does not mean that I will not do so in future, unlike Mrs Karabulut, whose party never supports military interventions and who always makes the assessment that our presence is more harmful than anywhere else."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-02-06-tweedekamer-3.u112", "speech text": "Let me just say this for the sake of certainty, because that misunderstanding also threatened to arise. I do not believe that Dutch soldiers fought there, at most in self-defense if necessary. However, the suggestion that it was a fight mission evokes a bit of the analogy as if it were something like in Uruzgan where a reconstruction mission was screened, while in fact there was a need to fight hard to secure the stability of that province. I think it is important, especially if we evaluate a mission together, that we do evaluate the mission as it happened. It wasn't a fight mission; it was a police training mission."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-02-06-tweedekamer-3.u183", "speech text": "That is also what I trust when the Commander of the Armed Forces says under Article 100: that is what we are going to deliver. But as far as communication is concerned: where there is sometimes something wrong but where it can be done, it might be useful to mention it in advance in that transparency. We had a discussion at middle defense formation the other day. At that time, the question was also asked whether my judgment would have been different. I said: 'No, but I have a responsibility to bear; I have to explain it to my group'. If we could have known things in advance, I think that is a little more convenient than explaining afterwards."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-02-12-tweedekamer-7.u108", "speech text": "Thank you, Mr President. Last Sunday, Minister Kaag held the King's address at the remonstrant church in Bussum. She talked about justice and justice there. According to a report in the Reformatorisch Dagblad, she did so on the basis of Micha 3, verse 8. In short, the text would read: \"There is said to you, man, what is good: nothing but to do justice and to be faithful.\" I was rather surprised by that. I know from my childhood in Katwijk that there was a winged word there: \"No cleaner spell and more powerful than Micha 6 and verse 8.\" Was Katwijk wrong? Did the minister mistake himself? Or did the little swimmer gain access to the Reformatorisch Dagblad? I think the latter, because the Reformatorisch Dagblad soon modified the reference. It would have been Micha 6 on second thought and not Micha 3. However, in the context of the CETA debate, I am glad that thanks to the Reformatorisch Dagblad Micha 3 I have been looking for some more. Micha was a farmer. He goes to Jerusalem, say: The Hague, the inner court of that time. He entered the Tr\u00eaves Room and began to lecture the high-ranking gentlemen, and he made no mistake about it. \"You hate good and love evil,\" he says. It's pretty plastic how he describes what those leaders do there. \"The people of the people strip them of their skin,\" according to Micah, \"and the flesh they take from the bones.\" They leave nothing of the people. \"Listen, leaders,\" he also said, \"you hate honest justice.\" Mr. Chairman. We are not going to do an exegesis here, of course, but I found it striking that the minister decided to give a sermon in a church the Sunday before the major CETA debate, that she chose a Bible book in which the leaders of the people were getting a lot of it, actually throughout the book, and that she was just picking out that one verse that sounded pretty good. That's more than telling enough. Talked to Micha about 700 years before Christ, the minister spoke last Sunday. And today we are discussing how to assess CETA and how this European Free Trade Agreement between the EU and Canada is being sold by the Minister to the Netherlands. Since the Minister has studied Micha, I would like to ask her to reflect on what he says in that Bible book. In modern human terms, it comes down to the following. You don't have to wonder how to do the right thing. You know that a long time ago, but the question is, are you gonna do it, too? Do you dare stand for justice and justice or are you just talking a little bit about it? Because the Minister, to put it diplomatically, is making a fool of himself. She even sent a letter to make those who warn against the consequences of this trade agreement between the European Union and Canada suspicious and accused of lies. Farmers' organisations, consumer organisations, trade unions, Arjen Lubach: anyone who says anything negative about CETA gets it from the Minister. Canada is the dreamed trading partner for her. If you can't do business with Canada, then you can't do it with anyone, her crushing simplistic reasoning, which she was doing in Buitenhof. Canada, the country far behind in animal, natural and environmental regulations. Canada, the country that according to The Guardian reached a new low in climate hypocrisy last week. Canada, which drives away its original inhabitants and destroys on a very large scale nature for the extraction of tar sand oil, the most devastating and polluting fuel in the world. Canada, which still allows young seals to be bludgeoned to death. That Canada is the promised country for Minister Kaag. Mr. Chairman. The Animal Party prefers peasant fur rather than seal fur, and because today I want to remind the Minister of the interests of farmers, who are at stake, I have chosen an appropriate outfit, with farm fur motif, for that. Previously, the Minister replied to questions from journalists about, for example, the Free Trade Agreement with Brazil and its associates, the Mercosur Convention, that she had not thought at any time about the consequences for Dutch agriculture, whereas it is precisely the Dutch agriculture that is at stake in these kinds of treaties. Mr. Chairman. CETA is, of course, much more than a trade agreement. It is a treaty with a huge set of agreements: on investment protection and on a consultative structure with no less than 20 committees, in which mutual standards are discussed behind closed doors and, above all, lobbying hard. CETA is a treaty negotiated by the European Commission with Canada between 2009 and 2014. After that, some minor adjustments were made to the investment protection mechanism, ICS, under considerable public pressure. In the long term, 98% of import duties will be completely abolished. Canada is a major exporter of agricultural products such as rape, wheat, soya, beef, potatoes and pork. In exchange for the lower import rates of Canadian agriculture, European pharmaceutical companies will have the right to extend their patents in Canada longer. That means profit for Big Pharma in Europe and higher costs for people who need medicine in Canada and elsewhere in the world. Europe can also export more milk and cheese to Canada. Of course, this raises the question of how this relates to the circular vision, which, after the signing of CETA, has been officially designated by this cabinet as the path that farmers must take. How does this relate to the climate targets that this cabinet will have to meet? In doing so, the cabinet cannot look away from the livestock, and therefore not, precisely, from the dairy herd. Mr. Chairman. We have asked several questions about working groups of European and Canadian officials who can adapt everything to the Treaty in backrooms. No clear answer has yet been given to this question. That's a lot to think about. The treaty is, let me say it carefully, controversial. The only line of defense that the persistent supporters are the VVD, the CDA and D66; those are the only three parties that are heartfeltly in favour of his........................................................................................................................................................................................................................................... On balance, they mean, because these proponents also recognise that there are also people who are becoming poorer with CETA and that we will also have climate and nature effects. But yes, so they say, there are always winners and losers. And the losers should just be happy that others are getting rich or something. As long as we get richer as a whole, that's good for everyone. Mr. Chairman. This way of thinking, this cold neoliberal calculus, has caused great havoc in the world. Also in the Netherlands. The idea that if we get richer on balance, then everyone gets better, they're gonna be lied to every day. Look at Ireland; if I am not mistaken in recent years, the country with the highest economic growth in all European Member States. There's more people out there than ever. That's not how it works. You can't say we're getting richer, and so that's good for everyone. Certainly not if the way in which you get richer only goes through the disproportionate advantage of big business, at the expense of citizens' rights, at the expense of the capital that belongs to all of us. Whether you're rich or poor, the natural resources our nature, a healthy climate should be equally accessible to everyone. The cabinet puts that on sale because of a trade deal with Canada. Mr. Chairman. It's this old thought that we need to get rid of very quickly at the beginning of 2020, the new decade. CETA is therefore a convulsion of thinking that has had its longest time. I was pleasantly surprised by the insights that also appeared with the VVD and also with D66 during the past political reflections. There are limits to growth, said group chairman Rob Jetten. That's great fun, but when is D66 gonna respect those boundaries? Liberalism must go back to working for people, said the leader of the VVD. Yeah, it's great! But why do you now agree to a free trade agreement based on that old thinking, which you are asking critical questions about? Minister Kaag says it would be a historic mistake if we did not ratify CETA. I say it is a historic mistake if we approve what should have been in the trash a long time ago today. Because the insights have changed and the world has changed. Since the European Commission concluded the trade deal with Canada, we signed the Climate Agreement, this cabinet acknowledged that the current agricultural system is unsustainable, it pointed out the circular agriculture as an official new course that Dutch farmers should follow and presented Minister Schouten with a vision of the future of poison use that means \"we use far too much poison in Dutch agriculture; that really has to go down.\" Since the negotiation of CETA, the nitrogen crisis also broke out, which various parties here have said about, and I am glad to say that agriculture must really change. It has to be, but then you can't make it to open the door at the border to tough competition. Since CETA's negotiation, the European Commission has presented a green deal with a lot of bombs. And the European Parliament adopted a resolution saying that animal welfare in the European Union should go to a higher level. If you want to do all that, you can't go on with CETA. Or you're and will remain a two-faced administration that the citizens and the farmers can't count on. Let me give you a few examples of agriculture. Thank you to Mr Diks, who has already explained a lot of things that we regret to have to repair here today, because the minister in the newspapers and on television has turned his eyes on all the opponents. The facts are: yes, the products exported from Canada to Europe must meet product standards at the border, such as the same food safety requirements and animal health requirements. That is quite different from production requirements. I'm just going to refer the minister back to her waving the Bible. Does she think it's fair to tell half the story, the story that sounds good and makes people think there's nothing wrong? In Canada, farmers have to do the same thing as in Europe, so why bother with abolishing these import tariffs? Well, because the minister deliberately tells half a story. She was even throwing sand in her opponent's eyes so badly that the advocates didn't understand it anymore. I saw Mr Weverling say at Radar that Canadian farmers must meet the same animal welfare requirements as those in Europe. That's just not true. What the Minister always means is that if the meat is on the European border, it may contain as little salmonella as it does in Europe. It does not say that the rules on animal welfare in Canada are much lower than in the European Union. She's not very honest, is she? Mr. Chairman. For example, Canadian farmers may also use poisons that are no longer allowed here. We have had to fight long and hard for that. That fight is far from over. Neonics, those super-dangerous toxins that have been classified as very disastrous for insects, for bees, have finally been restricted in open crops in the Netherlands after a long time. In Canada, farmers can still use them. What does the Minister say to farmers who don't think that's fair? They must compete against farmers who are allowed to use toxins and thus produce cheaper and more mass than they do. The Minister simply doesn't answer that. What's that about? Group accommodation for sows is not mandatory in Canada. The minister says Canada's working on it. In 2014, the Convention was negotiated between the European Commission and Canada. They've had six years. We haven't seen anything yet. So what do you mean, they're working on it? The hard facts in that treaty say that the European market is open to Canadian pork. The soft side is that we're going to talk to Canada a little bit if they want to change their rules too. You have no guarantee of that. Experience has shown that this is not going to happen either. Canada has not yet shown that they are serious, because otherwise they would have done it in six years. The hard facts are about to compete with European farmers and the soft, anointing words that the Minister speaks mean nothing at all. It is dramatic for the animals and it is unfair to the farmers. The funny thing is, the cabinet gets it, too. I read a quote: \"When I hear some politicians, they really want to compete on these kinds of rules. But if a cheap pesticide is allowed in a particular country, but because it is not bad for the environment in the EU, then you don't want the products used to come on the market with us.\" It was Minister Blok who said this, in the context of the negotiations with the United Kingdom, now that the Brexit has continued. So when it comes to the United Kingdom, the Cabinet understands that you do not do that to bully the British, but simply because it is not fair to your own farmers. So if you understand that for the United Kingdom, why wouldn't you understand that for Canada? Mr. Chairman. If you ask the farmers, they say \"no.\" What really surprises the Animal Party is that the coalition parties seem to be okay with Minister Schouten meeting the farmers in everything, but Minister Kaag in absolutely nothing. She doesn't have to do that at all. However, if you declare the current agricultural system untenable, then the trade policy that has driven this system is of course quite the same thing. Farmers do not go on their own for just bigger, just more, competing at cost and bulk production. Doesn't make anyone happy. Because it had to be in this cold commercial policy of this cabinet, and there was no protection whatsoever, agriculture has developed so that we now say that the whole system is unsustainable. Then you have to start by looking at the driver of it. It's cause and effect. Our blind trade drive, our neoliberal trade policy, has been the driving force behind an agricultural system in which we have to stop five to seven farmers a day, because they cannot win the unequal battle, and that everyone who knows about it has seen it as untenable for at least twenty years. It is recognized by the cabinet, but it is a cabinet with two faces. It wants to reform agriculture, but not shut down the driver of the bankrupt agricultural model. Then there is the exclusive investment protection for multinationals. Only multinationals, foreign investors with activities in Canada can challenge the Dutch State and other EU Member States to a separate investment tribunal. Trade unions, citizens, environmental organisations and states themselves cannot do that. Soon no one seems to want this tribunal anymore. The minister says I didn't have to. The VVD says: neither do we, but yes, there were others who wanted to, so why not? But why not listen to trade unions, consumer organisations, food safety watchdogs, privacy clubs, critical Canadian parliamentarians, environmental organisations and many others? They all say, \"Don't do it.\" Why don't we listen to them? The Vermillions, the ExxonMobils, the Halliburtons and the Cargills of this world, who already enjoy enough protection and have barracks with lawyers to make the most of any possibility offered by national legal systems to protect their own interests, receive additional investment protection, because they do feel that the enormous climate transition could be at the expense of their fossil investments. Why give these companies even more power over the legal system, which in itself takes into account the risk of expropriation when a state takes a decision at the expense of investment? That protection is already there. Then why is it so necessary to give these multinationals an extra layer of protection?"}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-02-12-tweedekamer-7.u361", "speech text": "Yeah, but if D66's gonna set up these lines of defense, it's gonna have to be countered with the facts. The conversations we've seen..."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-02-12-tweedekamer-7.u404", "speech text": "Now the monkey's coming out of the sleeve. Chinese, Brazilians: creating scare images, that was also the CDA's defense at the dividend tax. While they knew that dividend tax was for the three big multinationals, they came up with stories like this. When are you going to stop telling these kinds of stories and creating fear images and just admit honestly what you just said: it's not ideal. Yes, Mr. Amhaouch, CETA is not ideal. Now tell the farmers what is not ideal for them. Tell me the truth."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-02-13-tweedekamer-2.u22", "speech text": "So they've been worried about this for a long time. I find it so tiring, I'd almost say, that we keep hearing that if you don't agree with CETA, you probably don't get it. That's a very bad defense, because what the cabinet should do..."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-02-13-tweedekamer-7.u21", "speech text": "The NVWA veterinarians have become too intertwined with the system. They're whacking and kicking. It can't be done at all. That's why I've been asking for years, without the support of the VVD: go make duo teams with the animal police. If there's one animal policeman or woman in there, no one's gonna get it in their head. They have criminal jurisdiction and police powers. They have pepper spray, a gun and a baton. And they're gonna intervene. They won't allow it. Then the intimidations in the slaughterhouses will be over. There are a lot of good NVWA veterinarians, but the less good ones we have unfortunately seen less good ones................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................... For that, you need the animal welfare teams and you need control of... the animal police! No one supports it. Why not? Why isn't the animal police being called in anymore? Why? We got 'em. It's purely political unwillingness. It's party politics over the back of defenseless animals. I just think it's outrageous. And then the meat is all eaten up, that tortured flesh. Well, I couldn't get it down my throat anymore, I'm telling you that honestly. That's why I became a vegetarian."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-02-13-tweedekamer-7.u106", "speech text": "I know that Mr De Groot has already decided not to eat meat. If you say the words \"morally bankrupt,\" you can't stay away from the whole system of milk production. In this system a defenseless animal is inseminated every year and then a young child is born, which is taken away immediately after delivery so that the milk can be appropriated. This is also the case in organic dairy farming. I challenge Mr De Groot to support the Animal Party in any case, so that we can be transparent about it. People have no idea. We've also seen footage..."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-02-18-tweedekamer-31.u27", "speech text": "The second motion, in part No. 458, is Mrs. Diks'. She's about engaging the environment. I would like to make two comments. The motion is fairly broad. I agree with Mrs Diks: Defence must be a good neighbor. Mr. Kerstens said the same thing. After all, defense is everywhere in the Netherlands. On the one hand, a lot of people are very proud of Defence, but on the other hand, we also realize that the presence of Defence can sometimes be accompanied by nuisance, for example by exercises, by flying or by whatever. The motion is now very broad. I would ask Mrs Diks to allow this only to apply if it is major changes. Can I interpret the motion like that? 'Cause we do exercises all the time, of course. Internationally, it is also simply announced. So may I interpret the motion in such a way that this simply applies to major changes? There is also the Environment Act. The petitioner must realise that we also have a deadline for implementation. This applies to all governments. That is what we are going to do in that context. But I would also like to say to Mrs Diks that it cannot be done at once, also in the context of the Environment Act. That law will, of course, be implemented in the coming period. And with the establishment of the National Real Estate Company, the full capacity of Defence for environmental management has gone to the National Real Estate Company. So it really takes a while to build this up. So may I interpret the motion as follows? Mrs Diks asks that this be done in the case of major changes covered by the Environment Act. That's what the motion says. If I can interpret her like that, I'll give her judgment room."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-02-18-tweedekamer-31.u28", "speech text": "I can imagine, because of course I do not mean that this also applies to very small changes. Then the defense should continue to fill in all kinds of new structures. But I will come to the interrupting microphone for a while, because it should not be an escape in that sense, where we end up in a discussion about what is big, and what is small. That would be too lame."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-02-18-tweedekamer-34.u2", "speech text": "Thank you, Mr President. Let me start with the good news today. Today we received a letter from Mr Hoekstra, the Minister of Finance, that we will get 17 million back from the European Union. That's not common; 17 million. We had to pay 50,000 million first, but at least we get 17 million back. That's good news, isn't it? Mr. Chairman. We are discussing today how much the EU can spend over the next seven years. So how much do we have to pay to Brussels? This Prime Minister's going in hard. Not a penny extra to Brussels, he calls. But where have we heard that before? When he yelled, \"Not a penny to Greece.\" He then transferred 10 billion to Athens. Anyway, he's doing it again: not a penny extra to Brussels. Hope brings life. The question before us today is what the Prime Minister will do if the Netherlands eventually pays more to Brussels. Is he gonna veto it or is he gonna sign it again at the cross? We are paying more than 8 billion to Brussels this year. Just for the imagery: that's more than what we lost to the police in the Netherlands or about what we lost to secondary education. 8 billion euros! If we do nothing, this contribution will automatically rise above EUR 10 billion. Tell him an entire defense budget disappears to Brussels. Footie! Do something nice with it. But of course this is not enough for the Commission. He wants more. They want EUR 2 to 3 billion more, say 13 billion per year from the Netherlands. And they want their own resources. What do these new own resources mean for the contribution of the Netherlands? What does that plastic tax mean? How is it levied? Some of the allowances are being skimmed from the ETS, if I have to believe the letter. What's that look like? Instead of our Prime Minister traveling to Brussels to pay substantially less, he is fine with it. His bet is to stop paying. So we'll just be the biggest net contributor to Europe over the next seven years, and he'll accept that. The PVV wants to pay less and preferably nothing at all. The PVV wants out. Away from the EU that is trying to take over our country. Away from that transfer union where our tax dollars flow to the Eastern bloc and to Club Med. That's why we've been pleading for a nexit for years, to be free and sovereign again and again boss over our own country, our own money and our own borders. There are still two pressing questions, however, about European taxation and our right of veto. In the past, two motions from the PVV have been adopted calling on the government never to agree to European taxes and not to give up our right of veto in any area. These motions were adopted by a large majority. Each time it comes back that the Commission is trying to undermine these cases. It talks about the introduction of European taxes, a plastic tax, a CO border tax, a flight tax, a Googletaks, a financial transaction tax and a European corporate tax. If we give in to that, it's waiting for the moment we get a blue envelope with stars on the doormat. What's the Prime Minister's status on this? Is he indeed going to block any form of European taxation? The same applies to our right of veto. We just had another VAO with Secretary of State File Letter. He hasn't quite understood it yet. He does not understand that there is a motion from the House of Representatives that says that our right of veto is not affected. He's gonna look into the next Energy Directive to see if he's gonna implement this motion. Of course, that's not how we got married. I would like to hear from this Prime Minister that for a moment he is going to give Mr Filipino an emergency course in parliamentary membership and work, because of course it is not meant to be."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-02-19-tweedekamer-10.u44", "speech text": "What a joke, this, and I really mean it. Because what has the CDA been doing in recent years to pull up some kind of smokescreen around the fact that the government, your coalition, isn't doing anything? Just point to municipalities that don't want to build in the green. That's the defense line the CDA's coming with. Rijnenburg? In ten years, at the earliest, if you get what you want. That is not the solution to the housing crisis now. The solution to the housing crisis now is to make renting affordable again for people. What is the CDA doing in that respect? An open question: is the CDA prepared to intervene in the market forces of the private rental sector?"}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-02-20-tweedekamer-7.u32", "speech text": "I think I have recognised more than equestrianly that this should have been done better. On your question whether this should have been otherwise, I have deliberately indicated to you that this should have been different. I chose this. I indicated that was a mistake on my part. But it wasn't just about my worries about the outflow. A number of elements came together. As a result, I said: if I look again at the move now, what balancing framework do I use? Then it's about the work-private balance. Then it's about how you make sure people don't have to sleep inside. I have looked at all the elements you have been able to see in the overview. A second aspect that comes with it is the changing labour market. We see that at least the number of young people will not increase, and that is really what the Marine Corps depends on. You can see that the pressure on the labour market will only increase. Then there is the combination with the changing security situation. The Marine Corps is more dedicated to the first main task: the defense of the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the NATO alliance. This means that there is another way of practicing and that other locations are needed. There were no such circumstances in 2012. Then there was another situation and there was another question. These two aspects together mean that I have come to another consideration. I have already referred to you, and I shall do so again to Mrs Karabulut, who should have done otherwise, to Zeeland and also to the Chamber."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-03-03-tweedekamer-2.u71", "speech text": "I mean, you know, and that's not a question, just to be sure, is there any defence against a claim that says, \"You're late, you have to pay me this and that.\" Does the state sometimes say, \"I don't, 'cause...\"? No, that never happens. It's an automatism. One goes to the counter and collects the money, one million a year. What the Secretary of State must do, and the question is: if they do so... There's something like civil law, isn't there? If an asylum seeker himself contributes to the delay that occurs, to loosen money, then he is not in good faith with his claim. And then you can ask the civil court for interim relief to suspend that execution. Then he won't get a penny. If you are smart, you may in the alternative apply to the civil court at least until the decision on the application for asylum has been taken. If it turns out he's a fraud, he won't get a penny. But what you guys do as a government right now is just throw that money away without a hitch. There's no defense at all. The only thing we're getting now is a task force that has to come up with impossible solutions. Well, here's the solution. Defend, go to the civil court and bring an interim suit."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-03-10-eerstekamer-8.u215", "speech text": "Mr. Chairman. I too would like to thank the two directors for their reply and I would also like to thank their collaborators. I walked into the office by mistake during the break and saw large schedules with categories of answers and questions. I was impressed by the thoroughness with which our comments and questions are received and dealt with here in this Chamber. Mr. Chairman. \"Policy debates are about everything and lead to nothing.\" People who have been involved in this for a long time know that this cynical remark often contains the necessary truth, but not today. I quote my colleague, Mr Kox, who had to stay in Brabant, in a previous policy debate. And why not today? Because I think we've been talking about an important topic. We did that in a setting where we could also go into the depths. Undoubtedly less interesting for the media, but I think it is interesting for the rule of law. I have also noticed, as Mr Rombouts has just said, that there is a broad consensus on respect and stability in the rule of law. This gives hope for cohesion in society and cooperation. Mr. Chairman. Mr Van Dijk asked a nice question about the origin of the law. Minister Grapperhaus went into this and came out with the social contract. Then I must think of the French thinker Rousseau. He once exclaimed towards the king of Poland There is obviously always something with Poland and the Duke of Lorraine: \"The criticism is easy, because an attack with a single word requires pages of defense.\" I would add: and also words, many words to defend. But as Mr Nicola\u00ef rightly said in his impressive contribution, words have meaning. It is therefore important that we discuss it carefully. Mr. Chairman. I would like to thank Minister Dekker in particular for the strong position he has taken. I take it unseen that this is on behalf of the entire cabinet, and that is why it does not need to be repeated again by Mr Grapperhaus. In her maiden speech, with which I congratulate her, Mrs Veldhoen spoke from her own experience about squeaking and cracking. I think there have been some answers, but I also realize that it is a much more fundamental problem. I've been talking about that myself. Both Minister Dekker and Minister Grapperhaus have shown their readiness to do so. There are still some very complicated discussions to be held in the coming years, because I do not think it can continue in the old days. Mr. Chairman. What this debate could bring is an encouragement to the three powers of the triad to be in dialogue about how we can strengthen legal protection for citizens and how we can do it responsibly, each with its own responsibility. That is why I am tabling a motion on behalf of many colleagues in which we propose and ask the Chamber to ask the Council of State to provide information on how best to conduct this discussion. Why the Council of State? Because, almost every year in his annual report, he points out the dangers of the retiring legislator and we have had an earlier exchange of views on this subject with the Council of State. The Minister referred to the annual report of the Supreme Court, which also makes suggestions for improvement. In short, because these powers have to do with each other, they can also talk to each other. Again, while maintaining its own responsibility. I would like to propose a motion for a resolution to that effect. The President shall: Mr Backer, Mr Bikker, Mr Dittrich, Mr Veldhoen, Mr Baay-Timmerman, Mr Bredenoord, Mr Rombouts, Mr Stienen and Mr Otten proposed the following motion: [[Motion]] [[The Chamber,]] [[heard the debate,]] [[Whereas the close link between the legislator and the administration, between the controller and the controller, has made the citizen more dependent on the protection afforded by the independent judge for his rights;]] [[Considering that the improvement of legal protection provided by legislators and administrations to individual citizens could be beneficial in linking judicial experience with the results of legislation and regulation and with the functioning of the administration;]] [[points out that it is desirable to ask the Council of State for information to indicate how, taking into account the various roles of the trias politicians, the quality of legal protection for the individual citizen can be strengthened jointly by legislator, administration and judge,]] [[and goes to the order of the day.]] [[She's getting No. kst-35300-VI-T]]"}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-03-11-tweedekamer-10.u136", "speech text": "I find this answer very difficult to believe. How can the VVD collect and defend 200 million here by saying that it goes back to a reduction in income tax, whereas this government, led by the VVD, intends to reduce the tax on profits for companies next year and thereby give EUR 2.4 billion to large companies? How can you collect $200 million from people here with the defense that you're cutting income tax? I would say, Mrs Lodders, VVD, do not let that 2.4 billion go to those companies, but let it go all the way to a reduction in income tax. Then this 200 million-dollar flight tax, which does nothing at all, is totally superfluous. Let's make a deal."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-03-12-tweedekamer-13.u572", "speech text": "Mr President, thank you. I would like to thank my fellow Members for the debate and thank the directors for answering all the questions put. It was a strong debate, and that is good. But in such a solid debate, we must not forget that we are in this crisis together and that we must resolve it together. I also really want to tell the Cabinet that we will continue to follow it critically and question it, but always from the point of view that we need to get out of this crisis together. On a number of points, I am reassured by the cabinet. Especially on the point that medical devices are now heading this way again, which can protect the people who have to do the hard work in health care. That is very necessary, because we cannot leave these people alone. We must ensure, as far as possible and with everything in our power, that they are protected. A great concern, and that has been said a few times, is really about education. I found the defense there and everything that was said about children who are safe, to say the least, unconvincing. The WHO has also prepared a guide for this. We just don't live up to that right now. The WHO says: if you want to keep schools open at the moment, then you really need to ensure that schools are disinfected every day, so that every day is cleaned. That is not the case. You also have to make sure that there are hand sanitizers in every classroom, with every toilet. That is not the case. I could go on like this for a while. The Prime Minister said that education is being consulted on what is necessary. But in this crisis, we do not go to education to ask: what do you need to keep your school open? In this crisis we say: \"We want the school to remain open; to be able to do so safely, these and these measures are necessary. We bring them to you or you can order them and we pay them for you, but we give on a plate what the crisis is about.\" There is an important concern for me when it is said: we are going to consult with the field of education. This isn't a time to talk to them. If you want to keep the schools open, which I have doubts about, then we have to come up with solutions that will make it safe. Thank you."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-03-26-tweedekamer-3.u214", "speech text": "I shall begin with the false assumption that there would be such a situation next week. I think that we should really be careful about this, I say in the direction of Mr Wilders. It's really unnecessary to paint this ghost image. It is wrong that next week there would be a choice of who is and who is not on the ice. In all the answers I have just given, I have given the numbers as they are now known. I think it is my job to do that honestly, to do that correctly, to do that as precisely as possible. Of course, a simple yes or no is the easiest thing to do, but I have to do justice to reality. That reality is complex. That reality is that there is a virus raging around the world and that everyone is looking, that all countries are looking for the same ventilation equipment as the Netherlands is looking for. This means that all orders are now ordered by thousands of devices, which are insecure until the moment they are on the ic where you want them. That means that I have to be honest about what has been arranged and be honest about what can be said next week. Then there is no situation of choosing \"who may or may not be on the ic\" because in the end there is always the possibility to work with two on one device. In any case, there is the number of 925 beds. There goes the plus on top of the defense devices and the plus on top of the independent clinics, and then you're there. But we're not done with that, because there will be another week after next week. For that week, too, we want to stand up. In short, we are doing everything we can to achieve a scenario of bleak weather. We hope it won't come, but we'll prepare for it."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-04-21-eerstekamer-10.u83", "speech text": "I don't quite understand the misunderstanding either. Since 2017 this has been taken into account in those analyses of the WODC. There's gonna be another report soon. That motion is from December. To give some perspective: there are also people here in the room who have asked me to start an investigation into the cost of care at my very first Financial Reviews. That's gonna take a couple of months. It is not at the WODC, but among other things at the WRR. So we've waited two and a half to three years for that. That is not a reproach, because it is an important and comprehensive investigation. But this motion is from December. The WODC was already busy and it will soon come up with an answer. If that answer is not satisfactory, the cabinet will immediately request that more meat be added here. So I am always very open to the need of Members of Parliament to do it even faster, but I honestly think that this is really reasonable. It has, as at all in the area of tax avoidance, the particular attention of the cabinet. Now that Mrs Karimi and I have eliminated this misunderstanding, I hope, I have arrived at Mrs Sent. I thank her for her broad support. I understand her in such a way that she actually says: can we not put the FATF next to the bill again and conclude what has and has not been taken over? By the way, by far the most has been taken over. And in a year's time, can we see which pieces of it you might want to convert? I want to promise her we'll do that search-the-difference analysis for the next summer. That is also the logical thing, because we are having this debate now. The judgment or parts of it lend themselves to be included in a new law, in a law of sweeping or whatever, in a year's time, I do not want to give it now. Because that fits exactly into what we discussed earlier, namely in that broader analysis and broader intermediate position. I'd like to do it that way. I see Mrs. Sent nodding. In order to reassure her, I tell her that I am often in the business of shopping. By the way, in my father's defense: he also had to go to the supermarket with me on Saturday morning. So there's no misunderstanding about that. Mr Van Apeldoorn asked again about the percentage. If the D.A. or the FIOD does have such a percentage, I will share it with him immediately. I also agree with him that it is always relevant to have such percentages. Because of course I also have an above average interest in numbers and data. But this is what I can make of it right now. Mr Van Apeldoorn said: the minister is talking about the darkweb; but if cryptos are mainly paid there, why are cryptos a problem at all? That's a specialization of the misery we observe with cryptos. Again, and that is the profit of this debate: we have all said once again that we are very much in favour of financial innovation at the highest level. All sorts of things about digital money and cryptocurrency and everything new technology offers us can help society enormously. But then the observation is also that there is a shadow side to that. And it's in cryptos, too, with those you wish they couldn't use it. These are organized criminals who do so, for example, to launder drug money. They then use that money again on the regular internet. And they use that money on the dark web, too. So in that order, I meant to say it. Mr. Chairman. I would also like to point out to Mr Van Apeldoorn about the 1.7 million. That 1.7 million is right. But for the record, this 1.7 million is for the first year, where it is expected that this type of supervision costs will be linked to start-up costs, including for the supervisor himself. So you can't easily share the 1.7 on the number of companies, because then you come out higher than reasonable. Moreover, the 1.7 is not under discussion. In my opinion, Mr Van Apeldoorn picked it out of a DNB report himself. But for the summer, I believe that even before 1 June, there is also the exact sum. I will share that with the Chamber myself, so that there is no misunderstanding. That will be proportional and that will really be much lower than that \u20ac34.000. Mr. Chairman. I would like to thank Mr Ester very much for my comments and for his constant concern for the staffing of the Ministry of Finance. I don't think he's asked me any more questions. That brings me to Mr Otten. With regard to the obligation to register, I really must insist that things are different from what Mr Otten says. It's just different whether you have a registration obligation or if you have a licence obligation. You register and a permit is granted to you. That's just really different. The bar is also on a different level. The proof of this could also be found in this debate, because of course some of the members were also critical of the cabinet because we dropped the licence requirement. But that was because we wanted to take the advice of the Council of State seriously. Mr. Chairman. Then I'm a long way. I should like to ask the messenger if I can see Mr Otten's motion under letter F. My suspicion was that it went well in the first part of the preamble, but that the cart ran off the rails afterwards. But before I do that... Oh, it's kind of a long motion, too. My instincts are right. The first part of the preamble, the recital that you naturally do not want to do what is unnecessary, is completely clear. But after that, it's gonna go wrong. Mr Otten says in his motion that this would not really be proportionate and that it would not bear with the European directive either. Of course, that cannot be the case. By the way, at the end of his motion for a resolution, I was right to say that we listened very carefully to the Council of State, to the sadness of some Members of your Chamber. That has made us opting for the expiry of the licensing obligation. So I must discourage this motion."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-05-12-eerstekamer-6.u270", "speech text": "Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First of all, we are working on the compliments to the staff of the Eerste Kamer for the professional organisation and the good care. That should be mentioned for a while. Mr. Chairman. Thank you very much to the Minister for his inspiring, well, at least enthusiastic presentation and defense of this Law more space for new schools. However, I would like to draw the Minister's attention to the fact that his intention is to be commended, but that the intentions of this law and its implementation may differ from one another in practice. Mrs Sent has already mentioned this, in particular the socio-economic problems, but nevertheless. My group is concerned about this difference between the practice and the intention, the intention and the practicality of the law. The following questions I have to the Minister will explain. Question one: to what extent does the new legislation change anything in terms of enforcement and effective sanctioning as regards the funding, closure of the school or even a grounds for refusal of authorisation? The second question I have left. In his reply to the Chamber, the Minister says that there are fewer possibilities for the education inspection when it comes to quality standards. But in particular, is the quality of the content of education at a school not a factor in determining whether or not a school complies with the law? I am talking about teaching content that threatens our freedom, our values and our democratic rule of law. The third question. In his reply, the minister mainly talks about socio-economic segregation and says that the government, but also the municipalities, are pursuing a firm policy on this issue. He explicitly addressed Mrs Sent: the redder a municipality, the more active it is. In the Minister's reply, the PVV lacked the ideological conviction of this segregation, in particular through Islamization. I would therefore like to know from the Minister whether, even in the case of segregation because of ideological belief, this policy is being pursued by the cabinet. Does this also apply: the redder a municipality, how more active it is? Finally, my final question, Mr President. The Minister talks about an integrated policy agenda when it comes to socio-economic segregation. Does the Minister also mean \"integral policy\" policy in segregation as a result of Islamisation of education? Thank you."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-05-14-tweedekamer-7.u69", "speech text": "The wretched thing about the whole situation is, of course, that we apparently had that intelligence through the CIA agents, even in advance. They just couldn't be taken into account in the collateral damage estimate, because that's not in the calculation model there. They had to be considered at a later stage, in Qatar. Then the circles are only not made via that calculation model, as would be the case if they had been made before. Of course, I'm not a defense expert at all, but if I put it all side by side, my point is: why don't we consider that earlier? That was also a point that came out of the letters yesterday. Why don't we take that into account before the trial? If we had taken that into account, including the comments and the analysis already made by the CIA, those circles would probably have been a lot wider. Then perhaps it had come to the conclusion that it was completely irresponsible, because we knew that those private homes were 200 metres away. My question is why that wasn't taken into account in that estimate earlier."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-05-26-tweedekamer-2.u5", "speech text": "I want to start with the answer about the minors involved. I'd like to know if the parents have been approached and addressed to the behavior of their children. I would like to know whether rapid law has been applied and whether the underlying problem is being looked at. If you're 16, 17, or younger, and you're assaulting aid workers, that goes a long way. I think the Minister should sit up here. Then about the defense of boas. Boas' call for instruments to defend themselves is not new, but, of course, because of the current crisis, very urgent. In the context of the enforcement of the emergency regulation by the corona crisis we are currently in, boas really face even greater risks of aggression and violence. It is almost always about groups and they come in situations where warnings do not help and they have to pay heavy fines. This is not only about our safety, but also about our health. To be honest, I think that the Minister is very easy to ignore. I think that a theoretical discussion on a monopoly of violence is absolutely fine, but the practice now calls for action. This is happening now. The monopoly of violence is and remains with the government, also as enforcers, which are deployed by the government, can use their baton and pepper spray for their defense. The monopoly of violence is and remains with the government, even if we equip enforcers well to stand up for themselves and to defend ourselves. The VVD wants boas who have to maintain in potentially dangerous situations not to stand empty-handed or with an empty belt, as they themselves say. In the short term, for the summer, we want room for this, for enforcers who have had the right training. I'd love to talk to the minister about it, but we can't talk about it. Again, the practice now requires action. Is the Minister going to make sure that our boas can do their job as safely as possible?"}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-05-26-tweedekamer-2.u18", "speech text": "... arrest and self-defense skills. It's a really good education. If at any point in time the Chamber thinks that it is necessary to examine whether we should actually turn boas into police, the point is that you are talking about a completely different training requirement when it comes to the use of force. That makes sense, because we are generally a very guaranteed rule of law. So we have to make sure that we get it right with each other. In the meantime, I keep repeating it, I see it as my responsibility to keep an eye on safety and to ensure that, if there are such incidents, I have a good conversation about it. I'll hear what happened and attract myself to where there's been a shortage."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-05-27-tweedekamer-2.u8", "speech text": "To make a very small mistake, failure to provide evidence or failure to respond to a letter, many corrupted parents have been identified as fraud. Intentionally or with gross guilt not following the law was blamed on them. For the child care allowance, only a small mistake is enough to doubt someone's good faith. In an internal work instruction it says: make sure that it is properly reported, otherwise it will not be sustainable for the courts. If you were labeled a fraud, all the help stopped. Then everything was collected. You didn't get a payment settlement. Couldn't be forgiven. This has ruined human lives. We know the stories, and every time, I'm terrified of what these people have cost me. They got punched on the fist, they were defenseless on the ground and they were kicked. Now we're here. However, the set-up / gross debt has been looked at before. In April 2019, the Council of State said that this qualification was disproportionately used. I was promised by Menno Snel that Donner would look at that scheme/great debt mechanism. Donner didn't do that. Donner has told us in a private conversation, but the report is public: for all those who have been dealt with outside the fraud investigation, he was based on normal legal protection, but precisely that qualification \"set-up/great debt\" sets out all legal protection. How could Donner have done such a bad job? And how is it possible that this is the basis on which these parents are supposedly compensated or not compensated? Beware: 2,000 parents will be compensated with that compensation, but almost 20,000 parents will only get their money back. But they went through the same thing. They must now prove that they were entitled to child care allowance 10 to 12 years ago and that the Tax Office did not do this properly. They have to prove it. This arrangement puts those parents 10-0 behind; it's a legal swamp. So today's appeal to the Secretary of State, turn it around. If the IRS has no evidence that you're a fraud, that you can be blamed for intent or gross guilt, then the IRS must plead guilty and then those parents must be compensated. I also make the call: give people advances if necessary. There are still so many in the financial shit and they see on the news that billions are going to businesses, while they are still being approached as \"there will still be something wrong.\" Mr. Chairman. What haven't we seen coming up lately? A black list, a risk selection that is not good, a tax report and none of this shocking has emerged by Donner's advisory committee and by the Ministry itself; it has been investigative journalism over and over again. How does the Secretary of State look at that? Why didn't Donner look at the political responsibility? There's a business case of fraud that we've finally gotten public after long drags. It said: we're gonna perform hard, r\u00fccksichtslos. It also included the \"all or nothing\" story. And do you know who approved this? Prime Minister Rutte on the Council of Ministers. Actually, there should be a report against his cabinets. Parents are already being rejected for compensation this week. And how? Yesterday, Pieter Ommzigt and I received answers to parliamentary questions. It's so complex to compile the files, that those parents haven't gotten it yet. They've been waiting ten months for it, but it's been decided for a while: you're not eligible for compensation. How? You can't do that. Who judged that and on what basis? And now they can appeal and object. Let's not do it! Why is it assumed that the CAF 11 study, which was the first opinion, should be the measure of things? Some parents got a file. I'm sitting there reading it. It's really such piles of...... and I see things in there that the dogs don't like bread. And who's to say CAF 11 should be the measure? Donner says so, but who's Donner? Donner did a bad job. Your compensation scheme is based on quicksand. I really wonder if we haven't learned anything from Groningen. Say sorry, but don't fix the damage. It's illegal to give Exxon and Shell $90 million, but to let people live in unsafe houses. Is this the Dutch government? Don't let the supplemental affair become Groningen 2. It can't be. It can't be for those parents. It cannot be for the authority of us as Chamber and politics. But it can't be for the IRS either. There's a bomb exploded from the declarations. There are so many people who work in good faith, but who are in their shirt because a political cover-up has been created that is still not open. Once again, Mr. Ommzigt stands to ask for additional pieces. It is quite clear to me that we must investigate it ourselves and conduct a parliamentary survey. I don't understand why there's no support for that in this Chamber. But today, Mr President, I will fight for this compensation scheme, because it cannot be that we leave the Chamber and that the compensation scheme, based on Donner's quicksand advice, will remain in place. Thank you."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-06-02-tweedekamer-3.u18", "speech text": "Still, it's a little bit gnawy. The said newspaper is not the only one to indicate that certain investments are being postponed. One does not happen to come to the conclusion that this is the case. The Minister assures us that this is only about the play. That will come later, but the investment plan remains the same. At the same time, the Minister cannot guarantee that the 2% will actually be achieved. In fact, the pursuit of this is part of a kind of delta plan of defense, after the entire military force has been stripped in all facets for decades. How can the Minister guarantee us that these plans will actually go ahead and that the 2% will actually be reached within the agreed time? This should not be another game of political change."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-06-11-tweedekamer-4.u167", "speech text": "They wouldn't have had to apply for support if it wasn't all that big of a deal. I think a million dollars really is a defense ceiling, even if your company is big. I know a number of companies have a really big business. Those are also companies that have opportunities to take risks themselves and the like. Often this is a bit easier for a larger company than for a smaller company. This has also been taken into account here, but there has also been an attempt to balance the distribution in that pot, and I expect that sometimes larger companies can handle a little more than the smaller ones."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-06-16-tweedekamer-6.u12", "speech text": "Mr President, I had already reported it to the Registrar during the break, but I would now like to report it to all colleagues. The motion 34919 in part No. 62 at the vote under item 23, the notation consultation on real estate defense, we are happy to hold. It's about the Westerschelde tunnel."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-06-17-tweedekamer-2.u93", "speech text": "I am not blaming Mr Omtzigt for anything. You don't have to shoot all the way into the defense. I don't blame you. I believe you are genuinely fighting for that. But my question was not whether Mr Omtzigt is awake or not. My question was that it is Brussels that has made the wrong decision here. The misery has started whether we are awake or not because Brussels apparently made that exception, which they should never have done. The Netherlands didn't do that, did they? Isn't that what Brussels did?"}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-06-18-tweedekamer-12.u66", "speech text": "In the event of an administrative ban or the administrative route, the Minister shall take the decision and appeal against it. Then you go to court, too, but until the judge decides otherwise, that ban will stand. But that too is often a lengthy process; that is not completed in a few weeks either. On the civilian route, on the other hand, you file a petition. Well, there's got to be a defense on that. If the court has then ruled, that is a final decision, although it is not immediately final, because it is also subject to appeal. In order to arrive at that judicial test and to reach that more final decision, I think you will need time in both that administrative route and in that civil-law route. But with the administrative route only the order is reversed. This provides the opportunity for the board to take the decision that has a direct impact. The parties can and should then go to court if they do not agree with that decision. I think that is a very careful and very good route for Article 2.20, because that article also has a wider scope, because it covers many more organisations than the proposal that the proposers are defending today. But I can also imagine that for specific organizations, for those criminal organizations, you are also introducing this route. In this respect, I would like to point out that additional criterion used here is a culture of lawlessness."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-06-18-tweedekamer-3.u44", "speech text": "Thank you, Mr. Chairman. You had already invited me a little, so I think I should go into that invitation to Mrs Ouwehand. I've been listening. I have heard many stories from the Animal Party and from Mrs Ouwehand, but I have never seen it so sour and with such a personal attack towards the Minister. I would like to make a few comments. The Minister is in charge of her own defense. We don't have to do that. She's more than her man. I want to make one point. Mrs Ouwehand states that the legislation is illegal, legislation adopted by a majority in the Lower House and the Upper House. How can Mrs Ouwehand say that this legislation is illegal? At the most, a judge can find something about it at some point, but even so, that legislation is not illegal. I do not think it is right for us here in the Chamber to adopt a majority of legislation which is as illegal as Mrs Ouwehand and the Animal Party are against it."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-06-25-tweedekamer-9.u332", "speech text": "Yes, but the Prime Minister blames me for confusing things. I think the prime minister's defense was: yes, but it costs money and then you can't spend it on other things. I agree with him. However, in that light, he must defend why he nevertheless considers it more important to implement the tax reduction he promised for these companies next year."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-06-30-eerstekamer-12.u74", "speech text": "Thank you, Mr President. Legislation that is contrary to nature deserves to be held against the light, because it threatens everything that is defenseless. The government itself says: the Nature Protection Act is transformed policy neutrally into the Environment Act. Apart from the discussion as to whether this transposition actually takes place politically neutrally, the policy-neutral intention immediately makes this law obsolete. One would expect that the stakes would have doubled, and that this would have been reflected in legislation, because nature in the Netherlands has been behind for decades. Failure to respect natural laws and environmental boundaries makes nature worse than ever. Dehydration, deterioration, fertilization, pesticides and a blanket of nitrogen-painted ecosystems and require a delta plan for nature restoration. The landscapes become monotonous, silent, sloppy and empty. Species disappear at a furious rate. Over 75% of the flying insects have disappeared over the last 27 years and the whole useful insect quartet threatens to collapse like a house of cards. Many meadow birds, including the grutto as a national icon, are threatened with extinction. Extending the limits of economic growth for decades has led to this crisis. It is an ecological crisis caused by us, people, that would have a huge impact on our own existence and on that of future generations. Major legislative measures, which, above all, offer real protection to nature, are more necessary than ever. Thus, the policy-neutral transformation does not lead to improvement, but to further deterioration of nature. The Environment Act has two objectives: to protect and exploit the living environment. It is precisely this that is a deadly frame of mind, that lets nature continue to degenerate. It leads to a wider balancing framework, while we need stronger legal anchoring for nature. The core of the Environment Act, the broader balancing framework for local authorities, is at odds with the central direction of the Empire, which is currently desperately needed to tackle the biodiversity crisis. This supplement law has since become obsolete due to the nitrogen crisis. The level of nitrogen emissions from agriculture is unabated. Emissions of nitrogen oxide from traffic and industry have declined slightly due to corona, but will soon be back to the old level by attracting activity. The Remkes Committee made it crystal clear that more legal protection is needed. I quote: 'No target reduction, but legal anchoring of nitrogen reduction as a result obligation in the Nature Protection Act'. The Committee also believes that all nature reserves should be fully restored in 30 years' time. This opinion is in stark contrast to the legislative proposal before us, without the legal anchoring of nitrogen reduction as a result obligation and without intermediate hard, checkable objectives. In addition, the chemical box of the cabinet produces other animal feed, neither the animal health effects nor the effects on nitrogen emissions are established. Mr. Chairman. Regering is again: moving forward over the next election; who then lives, who then cares. We have long known, since the report of the Wijffels Committee in 2001, that shrinkage in livestock farming is very much needed to restore nature. This report, and the dozens that followed, were consistently ignored by the government. But what does the government do? In 2023, two years after this cabinet said goodbye, it will be assessed whether innovation produces more nitrogen reduction. In other words: a smaller herd is once again not fixed. This proposal is not only disastrous for all the citizens of the Netherlands, who are entitled to healthy nature and a healthy environment, but also nature is seriously deficient. The drama of uncertainty remains like a sword of Damocles hanging over the heads of the peasants. We continue to stretch the limits of economic growth as much as possible, while the exceedances have long gone beyond the moral limits. We are getting proposals on air scrubbers that increase the risk of barn fires and with funding for innovation we are getting more low-emission stables. As a result, we know that we have actually long gone beyond these limits. Nature is crying out for a better legal anchoring of its protection. What's so special about this Supplementary Nature Act is that within the Environment Act, it most clearly shows the bankruptcy of the present tense, the age-spirit of short-term politics and problem management in order to provide as much space as possible for economic growth. Mr President, I'm almost done. The decentralisation of nature policy, the core objective of the Environment Act, also shows this. Provinces may manage the shredded pieces of green in the patchwork: here a little off and there a little bit. We see the same thing when dealing with nitrogen: a little bit of it and a little bit of it off, without a proper national legal obligation to achieve results."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-07-01-tweedekamer-8.u165", "speech text": "As a historian once said, \"racism does not always come in the form of a white dot hat.\" Sometimes it's in the name of sweetness, sometimes painted as a child's friend on a holiday and sometimes at a football talk show. What always characterizes racism is that it is at the expense of someone else. Racism is often another's problem too. \"Don't imagine,\" \"it was just a joke,\" \"what's your problem?', \"I didn't mean it like that,\" \"joke.\" I feel like our society is finally changing, under pressure from the Black Lives Matter movement, the protests. Thanks to them, these excuses are no longer accepted. Comparing a word artist with a black skin color with Black Piet is just racism. Period. Mr. Chairman. Racism is not something some people do. It's not reserved for bad people. It's hidden in our systems. It's in our prejudices about each other, sometimes unintentionally, hidden in a joke or in a sincere question. So I'm saying this to myself, too. Don't be afraid. We all make mistakes sometimes. If we are called upon, let us not shoot in the defense, but listen carefully. Only then will the unconscious become aware. So recognize your prejudices, but don't act on them. But with consciousness alone, we're not there yet. The credibility of politics is at stake after all these protests. We need to get beyond the standard sentences. We must come up with concrete proposals. Fortunately, I have heard a lot of this debate. We must ensure that we ban institutional racism. In order to build a common future, we must also recognise our shared past together. That is why I ask the Prime Minister to apologize on behalf of the Dutch State for the history of slavery in the Netherlands. D66 and GroenLinks made the proposal to make 2023 a memorial year and then to commemorate and celebrate the 150 years since slavery was truly abolished. In 1863, there was a formal end to slavery, but enslaved people had to continue working for ten years to compensate the poor plantation owners. I just found out about this in my working life. At school this was not about and to tell the next generations the full story we want more attention to be paid to it in education, but we also want a national slavery museum. How wonderful it would be if this museum could be opened in 2023."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-07-02-tweedekamer-6.u25", "speech text": "I would have understood the thrust of the motions, but sometimes it is good to have the exact text as well. Mr. Chairman. I'll start with a few questions. Mrs Van Toorenburg asked about Vlissingen. That's definitely interesting. But I also say formally: the Council in Vlissingen and the Provincial States still have a final decision to make. I said this week in the debate to a question from Mr Van Nispen: once that is done, I will inform you in writing about what we intend to do there and how this relates to the search and previous closures of other prisons in the country. This is separate from the conversations we have in Vught; they just keep going. It has not been said that there will be anything there. It's an idea the mayor has there, and I find that interesting. I understand that the President-in-Office of the Council for Justice has also been there recently. But those conversations aren't off the hook. They're just gonna keep going. The talks with the unions took place quite soon after the general consultation. At that time, when it comes to the workload, it was agreed that each institution should also look specifically at where exactly the bottleneck is at. This often differs from institution to institution. Then it was agreed: let's see if we can make targeted plans for that. I must admit, of course, that since March, talks with the unions have been about very different things. By the way, they were pretty good too. I believe that, at a complicated time and with the enormous pressure that has been put on the staff, we were always able to get through one door together, even though there was, of course, with the FNV the constant conversation about the multi-person cells, as we know; I shall come back to that later on to Mr Van Nispen's motion. Then there is Mr Van Wijngaarden's question about the isd. We've run trials in a number of regions with young adults. The results of these tests were positive. Then it was said that we want to develop this approach. So, actually, we're just trying to switch on a little bit. I cannot quite place the claim that there would have been a reduction in the standard on case managers. On the contrary, the number of case managers in an establishment was very extensive last year, and specifically for the area, case managers are now also assigned to accompany prisoners in the extramural phase. Mr. Chairman. Then I'll go to the motions. First of all, I will deal with the motion on part No. 772, which says: we want fewer multiple cells, and that number should not increase compared to the level that is now available. Of course, that's a very complicated one, because the influx has been very low. That's why the proportion of multiple cells could go down. But of course it is very expected that the influx will increase again when lawsuits start running again and when we start calling self-defense again, so if we just start running at 100% again. So we would really get into trouble with this motion. I don't think that's the point. That's why I don't recommend this one."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-07-06-eerstekamer-4.u97", "speech text": "Yes. I'm gonna try to make it quick. I am going to give the shortest possible answer in the direction of Mr Crone, and I am going to comment on all the things that are going on. What is it? 12 or 13 points by the Court of Auditors and those seven of its own. Look, I see no difference whatsoever between what the Court of Auditors is proposing and what Mr Crone is suggesting, with the framework that is now in place. If Mr Crone reads the framework that is now in place, through the eyes of a private equity firm, he says: all the ideas to ensure that the government does not put unnecessary money into this are secured here. I saw the opinion of the General Court as a support for the policy and I read it smilingly, as I also smilingly heard Mr Crone's additional suggestions, and here too I believe that this is in line with that framework. Of course, sometimes it is necessary to look at Brussels. More generally, the 55% of Brussels also listened to us; in the industrial framework in the climate field, Brussels listened to us; we regularly discuss state aid issues with Brussels. So that is exactly Dutch policy, to ensure a level playing field. And that Germany would do more about sustainability in all areas... Well, keep that to a German, he'll probably think differently. In the field of the sustainability of the chemical industry, the fleet, I challenge Mr Crone to point out that gap to me. Explicitly, I say in his direction that part of that framework is that there is room for an upside. That's not in those standard regulations, but it's just, you know, the dresswork. But in the framework, so where the customization is, it is explicitly directed on an upside. It is intended that the taxpayer will not only be able to go down there, but also the ride upstairs. That is exactly the thrust of this framework. Then there is his question as to what level the interest rate is at. I think he put his question a little sloppy. The interest rate is determined by banks, not by me. I think he means the bounty. The premium also depends on the situation. It depends on the bank interest rate, the risk, the maturity and the share of the government guarantee. On this basis, a market-based premium is determined. But we don't set interest rates. Mr Otten asked how the government could have taken so much risk in the ecv. The ekv is precisely intended for very large projects abroad with a certain risk. If we did not have the ecv, a lot of entrepreneurs would simply not be willing to undertake these big projects abroad. All in all, the ecv has been at least a cost-covering institution in recent years. I don't know about the last stand, but when I was responsible for that, we even made a profit. But it is important for the Netherlands that large Dutch exporters know the government on their side in undertaking large projects. This is important for exports. This is also widely recognised. This includes risks, but it also includes premiums. So the government gets a fee for it, too. There was no defense role at IHC. When will the investment be recouped? I believe that this is becoming clear in the pieces. There is a bridging loan, where a separate upside is defined for the government. As soon as the first piece of work is finished, new private shareholders will take over. They pay the same amount as the government provided as bridge credit and thus become a shareholder. They thus relieve the government, with the exception of the onside, which remains as a share of the government. We do that because there is a clear public interest. This is a sector with a phenomenal appearance. The Netherlands is world famous for this sector. The Netherlands is famous in the dredging industry. That's connected to the construction. It is one of the most innovative ones, and I say to Mr Otten: one of the most sustainable dredgers in the world. A lot of employment depends on this, even in a vulnerable region. And yes, the conviction is that this company is viable. To let it go down by one accident, while it can be solved with a bridge credit, I decided to go too far."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-08-12-tweedekamer-4.u249", "speech text": "Yes. I'll do that soon, and I might get a few things together, too. First of all, Mr Jetten's question: has there been an error of assessment? I think that's too hard for me. It is true that reality has developed in a different way than the assumptions made in May in preparation for the situation of 1 June, in which everyone could be tested. Of course, we all didn't know exactly how that would go. At the time, I asked RIVM what was the assessment of the number of tests you will have to take when you say that everyone can get tested. An estimate has been made of the number of people with respiratory complaints: 30,000. How many are positive then? Well, for 2%, you have to be able to absorb that in each region and for 5% you have to build a country-wide flexible shell. That's how those assumptions were made. There was an assumption about the number of hours you need per source and contact research. Of course, we knew that it had to be re-evaluated. This is also stated in the introduction to the GDD plan. It says that it would be used for the period June to September and would then be reviewed. Turns out that's something else, which makes me think you need to scale up in a different way. The steepness of the development in one week means that you must be able to use your flexible peel much faster. Or maybe you need to have a much higher level of preparedness in each region, where there is, on purpose, a lot of overcapacity per region. Maybe that's the way to do it. I really want to take a moment with the support of the GGD and the military and medical planners of Defense to see how we can do that as best we can. I believe that the flexible scaling-up in this respect has not been enough to avoid Amsterdam's problem. Flexible capacity exists, but the speed at which it can be deployed does not meet the speed at which the increase can occur in a region. This means that the flexible restructuring plan must work in a better way. That also means we have to recalibrate it as far as I'm concerned. Once again, I shall return to that point in the direction of the Chamber. Mr Azarkan asks whether this can be done in two days' time. I don't think so, at least not if you want a good plan. That's gonna take a while. I'll ask myself at the end of the week. Then, of course, it takes time to really go through that and check it out. If it can be in the direction of your Chamber in the middle of next week, I will not fail to do so. I really need to take a moment to assess that in the best possible way. The SGP points out that it is not just about the source and contact research, but sometimes about the time in which the result is in, or the time between making an appointment and the actual appointment. The time lag in between is sometimes not quite in line with the two times 24 hours we want. That's right. These are often temporary problems, which also have regional causes. Sometimes they have to deal with the rapid design of a new test street, or with the transfer of a sample stream to another laboratory. There are all kinds of issues behind that. The steering on that should be better. That is also why CoronIT, the specially developed IT system, is being adapted to this point. That adjustment will take place on 1 September. Until then, we'll try to solve what's going on as quickly as possible. Today the web portal of the GGD went live. This allows you to make your own digital appointment as soon as possible, so that you do not have to do so by phone. You can also get your negative test result back as soon as possible, so you are not dependent on the call you get. On the other hand, this naturally frees telephone capacity, which can be used in a different way. In short, this process is being improved step by step. Indicators are used throughout the process. That was a question from Mr Veldman in the last debate before the summer, I believe. It was even a motion by Mr Veldman. We then took that direction in the direction of the GGD, or the GGDs themselves took it in the direction of their own regional organizations. I'm just trying to see if that's all I've had. Mr Asscher asked a question about the more accessible testing. That is indeed necessary. It's impressive what the GGDs now have to do with test streets and test capacity. Of course, that capacity is much larger than it was in the beginning. They started on April 6th. Meanwhile, they are able to run a thick 100,000 tests per week. There are 105 test streets across the country. Of course it started very small and is now much bigger. Mobile testing and home collection are also regulated. And yet, and yet, and yet: it can be even more low-threshold. You don't just have to tell people to get tested, but you also have to remove the thresholds to get tested. So it has to be and it can be even more low-threshold. We're working on that. We do this together with all the parties that need to be involved. Among other things with the Patient Federation we try to see how it can be more easily accessible. Then there is Mrs van den Berg's question, no by Mr Veldman. His question is whether sufficient use is being made of non-GMDs. That answer is certainly yes. The first-line laboratories, but also the first-line collection normally used by the general practitioners, are now fully used in the test collection. This applies, for example, to Star-shl in Rotterdam and to Saltro in Utrecht. But also at the test street at Schiphol Airport, there will be cooperation with commercial parties because this will result in additional manpower and additional lab capacity. In the meantime, this cooperation is being sought out, also because it is simply necessary. Then where it's about the rural peel. You have the national call center, a commercial party with which agreements have been made and who is able to make all those appointments and so on. They also call in the negatives. In addition, you have the rural peel. It was set up together with the alarm stations and the Red Cross. These are the two cooperation partners with which the national BCO-shell is set up. In addition, the GGDs hire their own people to put the BCO capacity in order. In short, both the hiring of staff and the cooperation with market players is done and tried out. As a result of the reports of the last few days, a lot of offers are coming in. Sometimes very ienimienia: one, two or three employees, of a company that, for example, does not have much to do, which should be used for source and contact research. Sometimes a little bigger, for example from call centres that offer their services. All offers from outside are of course considered seriously: can you do something with them and could it contribute to closing the deficit? At the same time, this is an answer to Mrs Van den Berg's question on the use of defence. Of course, defense isn't a magic tool. What Defense can do is accelerate the setup of the rampage plan. That's what the D.O.D. can do. The training itself will really have to be done by the people who are now doing source and contact research. That is the difficult dilemma: you can speed it up, but if you speed it up too much, you can't do it anymore because you also need those people for the source and contact research that has to be done. So there's a limit to it. But there is much more to be done in this acceleration and all these possibilities must be exploited. I think I have answered the questions as they have been asked."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-08-19-tweedekamer-3.u26", "speech text": "I don't have to do anything at all, especially if Mr Wilders says so, because if we listen to that, we'll keep going. What Mr Wilders is doing is rhetorically smart and very attractive, because you just say: money goes abroad, I don't know those people and they will have made it their own and there are people here who work hard and I give more money. That's possible, that's a choice. Then these people will have a better time next year or perhaps the year after or perhaps the next five years; the economies in other countries will be calving off, where we will have a great deal of trouble in a number of years. I think we should look beyond our noses and beyond the next few years and not just think about which people you'd like the most. We need to see how we keep making money as the Netherlands. That's not because I'd like money now, but because that's the way you can raise your salaries. As a result, you can also ensure that, also looking at the salary increase that is there every year in the care, that appointment that you have and which already leads to significant percentages, not only this year and next year but also the years before, you keep keeping money and earning money to have good care and to allow people to work in it, to have good education and to be able to pay the teachers and to pay police officers, defense and everything, and to be able to have a bit of a nice life and get ahead of things. Then you have to look at the long term and plan back. And I'm afraid this isn't always the best story, but sometimes helping others is actually helping yourself more so that we can continue to make money and collect taxes so that we can all continue to pay the care, education, the police and the army."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-08-19-tweedekamer-3.u160", "speech text": "The question is very much based on a unilateral act by companies whose aim would be to make us unhealthy, which would make us all defenseless victims. I don't see it that way. I do not believe that these companies have that purpose in all cases. In many cases, they don't have that purpose. They will want to make money and there are also good products to be found that you can say: is it wise to drink too much of it? But I wouldn't like to live in a country where I was told that I shouldn't drink Coke anymore. I understand very well that I should not do that too much, because then I become a cube. But every now and then a Coke must be possible and the company must be able to offer it. We have endless prevention programmes to ensure, of course, that people handle this vast array of glories that comes to us all day long. We all know that the effect of a Mars bar is very short and the effect of a plate of vegetables is much longer. Yet you also sometimes like to eat a Mars bar, but not too much. In my opinion, this whole principle is always an interplay between manufacturers, sensible citizens and the government that provides good information. If there were real companies in the middle that weren't right, you'd have to deal with them, of course. But I believe that the firms mentioned by Mrs Ouwehand do not belong to firms that are not good. I see Mr Wilders laughing. It itself has lost quite a lot of weight, so it is possible, despite the fact that the country owns those beautiful companies."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-09-01-tweedekamer-11.u14", "speech text": "But you will see that time flies, Madam President. Let me begin by bowing to the author, Mr Van Raak. It's great that he's doing this. His proposal could improve our democracy a bit. It is wonderful that he has literally put the referendum back on the agenda, so a bow. It is then showing off other people's feathers, because the law was actually there and he has adopted it, and the explanatory statement is almost copy-paste from the report of the Remkes Committee of State, Mr Van Raak agrees with that, but there is nothing wrong with that. When we discussed the abolition of the consultative referendum, I copied the text that Alexander Pechtold said at the time. So I note that this is a file of plagiarism, but it is for the good of it and then it is allowed. We are only doing the first time this evening, only the Chamber is speaking, but if I am a little hopeful, this proposal could reach a majority. Then we have elections and a second reading, in which it has to reach a two-thirds majority. Who knows what kind of room we'll have in March. If everyone votes PVV, we'll get there. But it actually looks kind of positive, so we're gonna keep our fingers crossed for this proposal and its author. Mr. Chairman. Today we are talking about the referendum, but with that we are talking about whether parliamentary democracy deserves improvement, for example in this way. And then we wonder: is the Netherlands actually a democracy and where is the power? Who's in charge here, and who's gonna decide what happens to our lives? Well, it's pretty simple. The power lies with the elite, plural, the elite of the Netherlands. The elite are the top of the institutions: media, universities, high civil service and the Public Prosecutor's Office. But they are also smaller entities such as the art world, the museum world and so on. What do we know about the political preferences of these elites, who thus distribute power? Well, they're all as left-handed as hell. Or, rather, left-wing liberale. There we see a horrific over-representation of D66, GroenLinks and the Labour Party. Stacks of research prove that. In the 1970s the people with the hippie ideals of May 1968 took over everywhere, and those people or... Their ideas are still there. De Volkskrant became a left-wing newspaper from a Catholic newspaper and the VPRO became a left-wing broadcaster from a Protestant broadcaster. The Labour Party, a bourgeois-social-democratic party, was taken over by New Left, which had as its main demand the recognition of the GDR. Everywhere we saw these kinds of takeovers. At my own faculty of political science, Professor Daudt was dropped off by marxist radikalinskis and put in some sort of broom closet. In the Netherlands, what the elite want is happening. And these are left-liberal ideas that emerge from May 1968: globalism, open borders, anti-nationalism and anti-colonialism. They are oikophobic and therefore dislike one's own, and they dislike the free market and often also Christianity, a predilection for drugs and tolerance towards crime. What else do we know about these elites? Well, they're supposed to be highly educated. And that is intertwined with their left-wing liberal ideas, because universities are hotspots of political correctness. If you are highly educated, then you were exposed to the indoctrination with the ideas of May 1968. We've known this sort of thing for years. I wrote a beautiful book about it myself, but there's now empirical research. Politicologists Wouter Schakel and Daphne van der Pas looked at almost 300 possible policy changes over the past 30 years and explained the results in addition to the preferences of highly educated people. And what does it turn out to be? Exactly what those highly educated people want happens. Apparently, their will is law. Sometimes the low-educated get their way, but that's usually when they agree with the highly educated. That's a very shocking outcome. According to the Constitution, we are all equal, but in practice there is a small group that almost always gets what it wants. It's the people who went to college. I quote these researchers. \"This conclusion has major consequences. If training groups were equally represented in the Netherlands, our country would look very different. To give a few examples, social services would be expanded, the differences between rich and poor would be smaller, immigration would be more limited, crime would be punished more severely and European integration would be reduced.\" Okay, so left-wing liberal madness in the area of mass immigration, climate and the European state of salvation can only happen if non-university-educated Holland is kept out of play, is kept out of democracy, simply because those institutions are the domain of those left-liberal and academic elites. They take good care of themselves and the people have checked. If you understand that, you understand why all these strange things happen in the Netherlands, things that the people don't want at all, from development aid to windmills, biomass plants and gender-neutral toilets. How does that work? A good practice example is our hardworking child friend Black Piet. Which shoe didn't he fill? And which chimney didn't he climb? He was never a problem. No one had any objection to him. But then suddenly it became a left-wing fashion to hate him. And then you'll see right away that it hits the elite. Why? Because it connects with their May 1968 ideals, such as anti-colonialism, aversion to the West and admiration of everything that is not Western. Then all the elites do their thing. Minister Asscher secretly organizes a meeting in which social groups are persuaded to throw Black Piet in front of the bus. A judge makes a ruling against Black Pete. The NPO talks almost exclusively with Black Piet haters. The police are gonna ban taking a picture with Black Pete. After that, the mayors put a dime in the bag and Sinterklaa committees put it on the throat. It's a reckoning in the politically correct circuit. Meanwhile, hypocritical politicians are publicly claiming: no, we leave it to society. But sneaky and sneaky they stab Black Pete in the back everywhere. Last year, oddly enough, Black Pete became more popular again. But that's totally irrelevant. What's relevant is what the elite think. Well, they hate Black Piet and so they have to kill him. And so it happens. Of course, the Sacrifice is not a problem. Why not? See May 1968. Mr. Chairman. We know you as a big football fan. A democracy is a bit like a pronunciation from the soccer player Garry Lineker. In 1990 he desperately cried out at the world football championship: \"Football is a simple game. 22 people run 90 minutes after a ball and at the end the Germans win.\" I would say democracy is something for 17 million people, but at the end the left-liberal elites win. Of course, the plebs can pay for the damage: development aid, biomass plants, Brussels and the electric cars of the political caste. The major policy changes in our post-war society have one thing in common: they have never been in an election programme. What party has ever advocated in an election programme to open the borders? None, and yet it happens. Professor Daudt, whom I mentioned earlier, said in 2002: \"The only thing you can say for sure about an election programme is that it will not be implemented.\" This summer is the support package for southern Europe: 1 800 billion. We are now suddenly responsible for the spending pattern of Italy and Spain. Publicist Ewald Engelen rightly writes: \"And so we are moving towards a federal Europe, without being presented to the voters; an undemocratic result achieved undemocratically.\" Indeed, we have seen for 30 years that power moves from the Netherlands to Brussels. Who has ever chosen Verhofstadt and Von der Leyen? Nobody! In the Netherlands democracy, we are not allowed to choose our mayors ourselves. In the Netherlands democracy, we cannot elect our King's Commissioners ourselves. In the Netherlands democracy, we cannot elect our own judges. In the Netherlands democracy, we cannot choose the Senate ourselves. In democracy The Netherlands, the States-General has a special hangout for lobbyists. It's called \"First Room.\" 75 senators have 319 side jobs together. The Labour Party, the CDA and the VVD for the younger viewers for a moment: those used to be the three major parties of the Netherlands... still barely get 40% of the votes, but they still have 90% of the mayors in their hands. Which party rules doesn't matter that much anymore. The Labour Party has only eight real seats in the Chamber, but her bobos are being parachuted everywhere: Peter den Oudsten and Ton Heerts are mayors, Frans Timmermans is in Brussels with party mate Diederik Samsom as right-hand man, Wouter Bos is at the State Investment Fund and Jeroen Dijsselbloem is at the Security Research Council, Dick Benschop is boss of Schiphol, Mari\u00ebtte Hamer runs the SER and Martijn van Dam is the number two of the state broadcasting. The fewer people PvdA vote, the more our lives are ruined by all kinds of PvdA types. It's called \"democracy.\" Professor Daudt said in 2002 that there are no representatives of the people in parliament, but appointed people who see the Chamber as a stepping stone to a job in the public administration. In my own words: not the place to control the government but to like the r\u00e9sum\u00e9. I've been the Home Affairs spokesperson for ten years now, and I've seen so many Home Affairs spokesmen come along at that time that I've lost count. They're coming, they're going and they're gonna be mayor. A outgoing CDA member once told me how that works. He was an alderman and he was dying to be mayor. There's nothing wrong with it. That's why he went to the Queen's Superintendent at the time, and he said: become active nationally, in the Lower House, then you have a great chance to become mayor. After having completed his work experience project in the Lower House for a few years, he was able to receive the chain of office. The Second Chamber as a transit house, as a pigeon house, that is not good for us. Well, chairman, if you're in the House of Representatives in preparation for your next job, are you very inclined to put the government on fire in principle, or do you think: I have to restrain myself a little, otherwise my next position will be in danger? But we have political parties, could you say, representing ideologies? Well, no, they've all become copies of each other. Journalist Syp Wynia quite rightly speaks of \"complosion.\" They all ran to the middle. Marrakesh, European aid packages, money for Greece, climate agreement, they're all for it. The parties, from the VVD to GroenLinks, can no longer be distinguished with the naked eye. In America, they would all fit within the left wing of the Democratic Party. The chairman of the VVD sees that party as a party for people who are positive in life. Party congresses have been replaced by festivals there. A former CDA member says she's not Christian, but believes something's wrong. In the European elections, GroenLinks and the PvdA had to fill out sixty positions for the StemWijzer and they reached the same 60 times! Mark Rutte wanted a merger of the VVD and D66. There was a movement to achieve a merger between GroenLinks and D66. It's all the differences between Pepsi Cola and Coca-Cola. The Netherlands is a one-party state, as Professor Oerlemans wrote in 1990. I quote: 'Because of ideological blurring, there is in fact only one all-dominant party. The parties regularly perform a play and occasionally argue on more or less minor issues.\" Oerlemans explains that only a few percent of the Dutch are members of a political party. Of these, only a small part is active. He states that about 0.4% of voters determine the staffing of the government. Mind you, that was 30 years ago, I think it's even worse now. Oerlemans argues that the right to vote hardly has a corrective function anymore and that the concept of \"democracy\" hardly applies. He speaks of a career oligarchie; a very limited number of ambitious people make up the service. The civilian won't talk. We are a democracy without demos. Well, that's Professor Peter Lemaire's verdict. We also see how MPs are the playball of the members parties. Members' parties are contrary to the Constitution, which prescribes us: without burden. It used to say \"no back-spoke\" as well. In the debate on the abolition of the corrective referendum, the representatives of D66, PvdA and GroenLinks had nothing to say but: yes, it is a decision of my party. That's as far as their motivation went. In the meantime, if parliamentary democracy is going so well and there is no need for improvement, why are the members of the coalition parties trying to run the 100 meters below 10 seconds if we have to vote? Voices are the core activity of a parliamentarians, aren't they? And then the House of Representatives has also been led by all those agreements that are concluded by everyone but not by the citizen. Corporate politics: energy agreement, social agreement, housing agreement. The most tragic thing is the climate agreement. Ronald Plasterk, the minister's predecessor, wrote on Friday in De Telegraaf that the agreement costs 500 to 700 million euros; that is \u20ac50,000 to \u20ac70,000 per household. I quote Mr Plasterk: 'Never asked a voter for an opinion on this insanely large intervention, first mistake. It has come about because a number of lobby clubs met, the fossil industry, Shell and BP ahead, in itself strikingly, and then their archenemy Greenpeace, supplemented by Minister Wiebes', end quote. And how did this climate agreement come about? We don't know. The minutes have been wiped out. It says 'the president will open the meeting at 5.15 p.m.' and then everything will be black. We can't even know which people are at the table. It just said, \"President: Kees Vendrik.\" After that, everything's black. The world's betterers don't need prankers. Everyone was allowed to join those climate tables, provided he is a member of the climate sect. For example, climate guru Ed Nijpels says: \"Critics of windmills have nothing to do with these climate tables.\" In other words, the Netherlands is a lobbyist country. For example, Doekle Terpstra, a lobbyist on behalf of the installation companies, sits at the table. The result of these climate tables is: the Netherlands must build the heat pump, by the same plant companies. This lobbyist can so finely name and build to send a fine invoice from his client. He's successful. He then becomes chairman of the National Coordination Team Ventilation at Schools. Now he can also bill with Minister Slob. De Telegraaf writes: \"Luckily Chef Ventilation, cap off, completely uninhibited and without other interests. Because as an installation foreman, cap on, he knew in a press release on 12 August that one in four schools has a ventilation problem.\" Netherlands lobby country. Another play. The State is throwing subsidies. Organizations are being manipulated that would otherwise disappear. They are always organisations that support left-wing liberal ideas. Environmental defense is paid for two thirds by the government. At the COC, that's 98%. Environmental defense is also at such a climate table. The government then negotiates with itself. Dark clubs like the Transnational Institute and SOMO, fighting our business, are tied to the subsidy. Kick Out Black Piet gets money from the government. The memberless Urgenda is financed entirely by the Postal Code lottery. A judge pays attention, a judge then agrees with that club. Greenhouse emissions need to be reduced. Dikastocracy. Yesterday, a judge decided that people from Gaza are entitled to asylum in the Netherlands. Citizen's checked again. Politics doesn't even matter anymore. And what do these judges vote? Well, there's a screaming overrepresentation of D66 and GroenLinks. Mr. Soros also puts a dime in the bag. For example, he finances the New Urban Collective, a club that acts against Black Piet, like Soros always finances anti-Western and Marxist actions. In 2014, the rise of the PVV gave him great concern. So he went to use his millions to influence Dutch politics. This after a meeting with Princess Mabel, who does chores for Soros. Soros financed videos against our police, who are accused of ethnic profiling. He also pays for actions for an even more liberal drug policy. Finally, drugs are important within the May 1968 thinking. That the Rijksmuseum no longer uses words like \"hottentot\" and \"eskimo,\" we owe it to the Sorosmillions. More stage. The far-fetched separation of powers. When it comes to destroying the leader of the opposition, the Public Prosecutor is happy to cooperate with the Minister of Justice. In substance, there will be coordination. I'm talking about the Wilders Processes. Ministers are whispering to the state's attorney's office. Officials are contributing to the press release of that same Public Prosecutor's Office. Police officers collect signatures against Geert Wilders, against the opposition leader who says something about Moroccans shared by 45% of the population. So much for the trias politician, the foundation of our rule of law. The trials against Geert Wilders are the biggest post-war scandal in our violated and crippled democracy. It proves how ruthless and ruthless the elite can be. No one should dare to contradict the diversity cult. Friday pronunciation. It's bizarre, too. Here in The Hague, in this city, Richard de Mos is deputy mayor and the coalition parties are very satisfied with that. Then suddenly a raid by the National CID, which falls under the Public Prosecutor's Office, follows. Officials at City Hall, who are ticking neatly, are pulling the computer from under their hands. Then the prosecutor's office will follow harsh accusations: corruption, participation in a criminal organization. It can't be on. That's a big deal. The coalition will drop the party of the Mos. Then we don't hear about it at all. That's totally bizarre, isn't it? The Public Prosecutor's Office therefore causes a change in the municipal administration of The Hague. It's kind of like a coup d'\u00e9tat, actually. How is that possible, in a democracy? A judge at the VPRO says that being a PVVer is a counter-indication to become a judge; that is, a professional ban. The mayor of Arnhem, PvdA'er Marcouch, who is himself a supporter of Yusuf al-Qaradawi, does not want PVV'ers to join the police. Those who want to know how tolerant the Netherlands is should apply with the letters \"PVV\" on their r\u00e9sum\u00e9; they can usually save themselves the stamp. PVVs continue to face physical violence, its threat, or violence against their homes or cars. I often talk to young people who want to work for the preservation of the Netherlands and become active for the PVV. I'll tell them what that can mean for their careers: not much good, not much soup. As I tell you, a feeling of intense grief amazes me. Getting active in this democracy can be bad for you if you choose the wrong party, like the PVV. The jobs are for the fellow runners who provide each other with grants and jobs. The windows, professional bans and other exclusion mechanisms are there for PVV's, and later for Forum members as well. Another play like that. In the United States, a member of the Supreme Court is only appointed after a long, long hearing by the elected parliament, Congress. Then everything about such a candidate is brought in; publications, youth sins, student life, everything. In the Netherlands things are different. There's a vacancy for top man of the Council of State. D66 Minister Ollongren then discusses this with her highest official. That's a D66'er. Together they come to the conclusion: the best candidate is a D66'er, Thom de Graaf. Has the good man ever published anything scientific in the field of law? Is he a professor? No, he's D66'er. Another play like that. The NPO is run by a D66 lady. The highest official media in the ministry is a D66 ma'am. She wants to make a career through D66, she says in the newspaper. Fortunately, there is still independent supervision by the Media Commissioner. Well, that was led until recently by a D66 lady who drinks beers with Ollongren in London. Then she went to work for EUvsDisinfo, a club that has to hunt for Ollongren for fake news. The D66 lady in charge of the NPO comes across the floor at Mrs. Ollongren's house. The NPO is once again a recipient of programmes by Mrs Ollongren's wife, such as the \"This is M\" programme. And who's the guest in this is M? Mrs. Ollongren. You understand, it became a very critical interview. We knew Madam Secretary doesn't have much to do with democracy. When she was alderman, even more so, deputy mayor in Amsterdam, she stated in an important speech at the municipality's New Year reception that if the PVV wins the elections, the election results should not be recognised. There! Then there had to be a Republic of Amsterdam. I wasn't surprised she didn't launch as a queen. So the second party of the Netherlands must never come to power. Her party is called \"Democrats.\" Her term of office has been very poor. She barely sent an Home Affairs Act to the Chamber. There's not that much coming out of her hands. The Ministry of Ollongren is a form of hidden unemployment. That service car could have just run around empty. The only thing Ollongren can do is announce things that don't go on, like her fatally failed crusade against the fake news, or announce a law that screams away in the First Chamber, or fail to respond to a motion of distrust against her in the First Chamber. Or destroy things, like the 30 municipalities they destroyed, or withhold a crucial report that should have played a role in the referendum on the drag law. But then: 26 June 2019. Almost in the injury period of the Ollongren ministership, she had once again arranged the press, and that led to this front page. The headline reads: 'democracy is being carefully destroyed'. Well, well, Mr. Chairman, the whole ministry was in a rush. Many genderless D66 official choked into his tofu: boys, the minister is going to do something; call the newspaper! And what wasn't the Minister going to realize? Well, preferred votes became more important, the election of the Senate was spread over two periods, and changing the Constitution becomes easier. And later we would also be treated to a youth parliament, hurray! Our President-in-Office of the Council often has to call ministers when they first go to the press and then send their ideas to the Chamber. Then there are a few days in between, and that's what the Chamber is angry about. Fortunately, the President then acts against the cabinet, and often it ends well. But Minister Ollongren bakes them all brown: more than a year later, as a Chamber, we still haven't received anything except a note, a kind of postponement note: \"You'll soon get something, dear Chamber.\" We're still waiting, bizarre! What a brusque turn of the Chamber, and that of a minister who deals with the Constitution. Mr. Chairman. It would be a good thing if this law were passed. It is then the only democratic progress in the Ollongren period, a law coming from the Chamber and not from this minister. Hans van Mierlo said it so beautifully: channels must be dug for power. D66 doesn't dig them. Three times, D66 ministers had the opportunity to introduce democratic innovations. Among the two Purple Cabinets, which were finally a great wish of D66. The second chance was when Pechtold was Minister for Administrative Renewal. And then nothing happened. And now three times is the charm of D66'er Ollongren as minister. Nothing again. The only notable thing that Ollongren has done in the area of Home Affairs is to abolish the consultative referendum: administrative aging. Democracy isn't very popular anymore. Boris van der Ham, former chamber member of D66, appears at all kinds of meetings. He writes: \"Remarkably often I hear after those meetings at the bar: well, democracy sounds nice, but part of society shouldn't actually vote. Also heard: many voters should do some sort of test. And also: it is bizarre that everyone's voice counts equally heavily.\" End of quote from Boris van der Ham. That's the whole egg eating. Democracy appears to mean something different in practice than many of them had imagined. Democracy also means that the people choose Trump. Or for Brexit, for Orb\u00e1n, even for Geert Wilders. Of course, that can never be the intention. So the people are a lot less popular, and thus democracy. Madam President. What needs to be done is a radical democratization of the Netherlands. Choosing mayors and Commissioners of the Queen themselves and choosing judges. And, of course, referenda, not only compelling, in this case to reject laws, but also to give the people the opportunity to come up with proposals themselves for or against masks, for or against mosques, for or against the Climate Agreement, or to dismiss ministers, as happens in many places in the United States. Mr. Chairman. My contribution today is not a non-binding academic exercise. Hans van Mierlo wanted to dig canals for power. And why? To make, like he said, a revolution before it breaks out. End of quote. A revolution often means violence. So Hans van Mierlo actually said: anyone who does not renew democratically, and therefore does not want to share power, will reap blood. It's up to everyone to think about that prophecy. What I said isn't noncommittal. It is a bitter necessity to limit the power of the elites. The ideas of left-liberal, or if you like highly educated, the Netherlands lead us to ruin, on a single journey towards Hollandistan. The destruction of the Dutch people by overthrow. The destruction of the Netherlands as an independent nation. The destruction of our culture. Climate socialism that will destroy our economy. Locking our sovereignty away from Brussels so that we become an unnamed province in the Greater European Empire under German leadership. Ideas have consequences. Thank you, Mr President."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-09-16-tweedekamer-2.u65", "speech text": "Well, first things first. Look, that judge isn't independent. Our rule of law is bankrupt. I don't trust that independent judge anymore. Why? Because that judge has seen all that material that the whole of the Netherlands has been able to see in recent years. There were notes from the minister saying this has to be kept secret. It was discussed in the Council of Ministers. The D.A.'s office has been assisted in defense. You name it. You can't think of it as crazy or it all happened to me what hadn't happened to any of you. It happened to me. And if that judge had really been independent, he would have crossed that line. Then the judge would have said, \"It's a political trial.\" Then he wouldn't even have gotten to the question of whether or not criminal offences have been committed. That's what the judge should have done, of course. But that judge didn't dare, because he lived in a climate where he couldn't. He thought maybe the cabinet would fall on it or that it would stand in the way of his career. But every judge who was independent would have said with these facts in a row, if he had been honest, that this is a political trial, I declare the Public Prosecutor's Office inadmissible, as it is called with an expensive word. He did not, and that is the independent case law, even against the leader of the opposition in the Netherlands... Imagine that. In which countries is it normal for the leader of the opposition to be told by the Prime Minister: I'm going to decimate your party. The Minister of Justice says about him: he's in our way. Officials have heard this and the notary has said that Mr Opstelten said so. Officials have been interfering with my trial, helping the state's attorney's office. Mr President, this is too terrible for words, isn't it? I don't know what kind of banana republic that is, do I? But it happened here in the Netherlands. And I'm also sorry you didn't record it for me. You should have said: how this went is just politics, regardless of what Mr Wilders said, regardless of whether you agree with it or not, regardless of whether I think it is a criminal offence or not. You should have said: my party, the VVD, has treated Mr Wilders here as a disgrace. That's what you should have done. You have abandoned me, as the whole Chamber has abandoned me, except for Mr Baudet. I blame you for that. I blame you for that, but also for the rule of law. 'Cause what happened couldn't. And now your second question. There was a second question, Mr President. That was perhaps the first question, but I wanted to respond to the first. Of course, there are Moroccans who don't break the law. I will come back to that later in my text. But the fact remains that Moroccans are criminal six times more often, commit a crime six times more often, that Moroccans are in prison 12 times more often, and I can mention a lot of other statistics. That over-representation knows no bounds. I said here last year: the poison of Moroccan terror is unfortunately in the fibers of our society. And we have to do something about that. Of course that's not about all Moroccans. That's what I've said before. But we have to name it. And then someone in this context asks the question: do you want more or less Moroccans? Millions of Dutch people would give the answer: yes. And before that, to take a politician, the leader of the opposition, with a political game of the VVD, to trial and get convicted... Isn't that the end of the rule of law? The debate on this belongs here, in the Lower House."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-09-16-tweedekamer-2.u414", "speech text": "Mr Dijkhoff is now going into defense without me attacking him. Well, that's new, isn't it? You're going on defense without me being able to finish what I wanted. But I'm just asking you a very specific question. In Italy, on average, people are three times richer than the Dutch. Do you know why? Because the Italian authorities do not levy taxes, they do not levy enough taxes. They don't have tax morals there, so the Italians are all going to party and barely pay taxes. We are giving 85 billion to that, as the whole of the European Union, 85 billion. But then Germany. Mr Dijkhoff, Germany is a richer country than the Netherlands! Why the hell do we have to give Germany $47 billion? What's the ratio behind that? Those Italians and Germans and other countries are going to do nice things with that. They're gonna lower the AOW age. They're gonna give the care staff extra pay, like in France. They're going to lower the VAT. All nice things for the people! Why do you do that? Why do you give a country like Germany 47 billion and a country like Italy, where they are still too bad to levy taxes, 85 billion? Why don't you say, \"Italy, why don't you start by raising your own taxes before I take the Dutch tax money there\"? Why don't you say, \"Germany, you have more money than we have. Find out for yourself\"? How do you explain this: 85 billion to Italy, 47 billion to Germany? Isn't that a very specific question about two countries?"}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-09-16-tweedekamer-2.u735", "speech text": "Mr. Chairman. I was talking about the power of cooperation. The Climate Act is perhaps one of the best recent examples of broad political cooperation. But now that the corona crisis is calling for the attention of everyone in this Chamber, we are threatening to lose the ability, as the King said yesterday in his speech to the throne, to look beyond the crisis to the future as well. And we can't afford that, because it's raining weather records and the global forest fires are driving us into action. D66 therefore wants to use the Climate Agreement as a springboard for a clean, fair and modern economy. The need for this was underlined once again in the European state of the Union. Now is the time to adjust. There are plenty of opportunities to accelerate, just think of wind at sea. Recently, large offshore wind farms have also been awarded without subsidies to the Dutch companies that build those wind farms, but also think of the many bottlenecks that still need to be addressed, such as our power grid. It is, of course, absurd that clean electricity cannot access the electricity grid, because the power grid is not ready. So all these big roofs remain empty, while we would all like to see solar panels on them. Choosing for tomorrow's world is not a question of a green religion, but of a hard economy. Investment in new technology keeps people at work and helps companies to create global opportunities to tackle a global problem. Where some politicians may think \"not right now,\" this cabinet says with D66 \"now it is.\" Of course, there is never a good time for a flight tax or a CO tax for industry, but they are coming now. That deserves a compliment from the cabinet. But all these efforts under the climate agreement do not mean that we can rest on our laurels. The look must go forward! That is why D66 and GroenLinks propose to lay new soil in the Climate Act, at least 55% reduction in 2030. We have achieved incredibly much over the past few years, but we are far from there. Therefore, let the cabinet remain eager on climate ambitions, because the attack is the best defense. That's what the Dutch sea hero Maarten Tromp said, but Johan Cruijff didn't come to the same conclusion entirely by chance. We, like the Netherlands, are best if we move forward. Mr. Chairman. Cooperation is also about solidarity between generations and our ability to increase opportunities for future generations. We have to be sober as to see that this is not yet working properly. Where your cradle has stood is now much more than ten years ago the case was decisive for your chances. And the problems start at a young age. Schools in difficult neighbourhoods suffer most from the shortage of teachers. Many students have language disadvantages, are in large classes or suffer from loss of concentration due to problems at home. And there are still far too many children who feel such pain. In the past year I have met them again everywhere, for example here in The Hague at the Princess Day breakfast. There, a 8-year-old boy told me to choose between breakfast or lunch every day. Or in Amsterdam, there a 15-year-old girl has no internet at home and therefore she cannot take lessons in corona time. Teachers teaching in such classes are doing so much more than teaching alone. And even that's not enough, because inequality continues after the school bell. Those who do not have access to books, museums or sports will have fewer opportunities for development. That pattern continues in high school, where in some places crime invades the classroom. That is of course a disaster for children, because where knives are in the lockers, hardly any book is opened. Thus, the accumulation of training becomes an exception, but the accumulation of problems becomes the norm. Those for whom the catching-up race at school has been successful against all expectations, wait a new hurdle, because more than half of the Dutch people are discriminated against in their application, of whom a substantial part is based on origin; more than half. Do you think it's weird that people get the feeling they're not part of it? Do you find it strange that they feel that the Dutch promise of a free and dignified existence for everyone was never spent on them? If there is something we need and can achieve through cooperation here, it is that everyone, all the people who live in our country, get the same chance to be who they want to be, from Groningen to Goes. No one's pathetic, everyone's part of it. Why should we want to do that? That's because radical equality of opportunity shouldn't be utopian. It is the bitter need to fight for it in the face of an economic storm. For how much better would our country be, how much stronger would our country be if we were to fully exploit the potential of all those people? If young people from Kattenburg, Katendrecht and Kanaleneiland do get a fair chance of a career? What if women get the chance to work their whole lives? If newcomers are given the opportunity to use their talents and experience in the workplace? Because without the talent and the input of those people, we're making our country small, and that's bad for those people, but it's much worse for society. So what's it gonna take to make our country big again? What is needed to blossom all Dutch people? D66 has ideas for that. Free childcare, so that children meet at a young age and women can maintain the rhythm of work. An end to the surcharge system, so that people get trust and never have to be afraid of government letters again. A loosening of debt restructuring on top of what the cabinet is already doing, to remove stress and care for people in debt. More patience with children in education, so that everyone can develop their talents optimally. Less workload and more salary for teachers, so children go home inspired after that one lesson. And finally: a rich school day, with food, sports, music and homework accompaniment, so that children never depend on their parents' wallet for their chances."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-09-22-tweedekamer-33.u207", "speech text": "I didn't start here tonight to screen for WHO investigations, that's what the Prime Minister did. I find the defence of the cabinet on this point, the defense of the Prime Minister, I see him getting annoyed, unconvincing. And that's where my problem is. It is precisely at this stage of the crisis that we must regain and maintain the confidence of the people. That means that if a mistake is made, an error of judgment or any mistake, please admit it. Then the sand is over, and then we'll get on with each other, but if the Prime Minister keeps getting stuck like that, he's gonna have a problem."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-09-23-tweedekamer-14.u7", "speech text": "That, I think, is at the heart of the problem. It is a development that has become increasingly important in recent years. Security and intelligence as well as investigation services as police and defense are increasingly using the opportunity to hack to pursue their goals. That is what they have done over the past few years, which is a discussion we have already had at the Wiv, which is actually done outside everyone's sight. They acted without a clear framework and made choices. These choices are becoming increasingly important for the safety of the Netherlands. What if there's no framework? In fact, we want a uniform framework in this proposal. Then it means that these organisations, all at their own discretion, without taking into account an interest that may be outside their direct organizational objective, make the choice to keep zerodays open, when there is no balance at all as to whether they should keep it closed or report it, so that it can be closed."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-09-23-tweedekamer-14.u42", "speech text": "I understand that question. I need to be more specific about that. You could say that you have two corners of a head attack, which are divided into a number of sub-invading angles. The two main angles of attack are on the one hand Defense, Investigation Service/Police, AIVD and MIDV, the intelligence and security services, all three of which, from a slightly different responsibility and a slightly different approach, aim to protect the Netherlands from threats from evildoers. Whether they are cybercriminals or terrorists or state organizations, they have that as their main angle of attack. That is, as it were, the angle of protection against evil. That is the main angle of attack one, which is already falling apart in three different organisations with a specific purpose. The police have a search mission and the services have an intelligence mission. Defense has a defense mission. That is one side of the matter; it represents three organisations that also use all three hacking software or those unknown vulnerabilities. On the other hand, you have the Ministry of Economic Affairs, the Ministry of Infrastructure and Water State and the Personal Data Authority, which themselves are not actively engaged in unknown vulnerabilities, but represent an interest, for example in the area of personal security, vital infrastructure or the economic stability of the Netherlands. These organisations therefore once again represent the importance of a secure digital infrastructure. Again, these are different organisations with different responsibilities. They come together and come to a case-by-case assessment based on a framework, a guide, and then make a decision."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-09-23-tweedekamer-14.u67", "speech text": "Mr. Grapperhaus will deal with the police in no time. Maybe I can say something on behalf of Mr Bijleveld about the defense. I think the initiator was just right. He has stated that there is no balancing framework for dealing with zerodays in the Defense Cyber Command. That's the part of Defense that can work with this kind of thing. In practice, however, there was a working appointment with the STUDY. Thanks to Mr Verhoeven and his own-initiative proposal, this work agreement has now been formalised. An unknown vulnerability found by the DCC, or Defense Cyber Command, must now always be reported to the STUD, which fits in with the common balancing framework that the two services have. With this also the military, Defence, has a well-functioning balancing framework with the same starting point as the AIVD and the STIVD, namely: report, unless. So there was a work date. It was not true that this did not happen in practice, but Mr Verhoeven was right that this had not yet been formalised. That's what's happened now."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-09-29-tweedekamer-27.u198", "speech text": "Mr. President, members of the Cabinet, members of staff. We live in strange and uncertain times, when it really makes little sense to look at purchasing power figures, CPB estimates and percentage points more or less. There are too many uncertainties, too many black swans to borrow a metaphor from the Minister of Finance. It is a time of great changes that will have a staggering impact on the Netherlands and the Dutch economy. Some may think that things are not going to go so fast, that our prosperity and our way of life are going to stay intact. After all, all that money seems free. At the moment, the government is even receiving money from government loans with negative interest rates. The European Central Bank's money presses are working overtime to repress extra euros, which would supposedly allow us to invest out of the crisis. Would our prosperity, built over the centuries by hard work, austerity and austerity, really be so strong and so robust that it cannot be broken, that we can subsidise indefinitely, that we can leave unlimited limits open, that we can build windmills and solar parks with subsidies, that we can sponsor southern Europe and so on? I fear this is not the case. Our prosperity is not self-evident. We must continue to work to protect our prosperity in the longer term, so that we can pass on the prosperity we now know to our children and grandchildren. Our economy faces three huge threats, which I have been warning for a long time: the billions of devouring climate plans, the ongoing mass immigration and the hopeless EU. On top of that, of course, we are now faced with very far-reaching measures to combat the corona virus. Those measures leave a trail of destruction. It is these four major elements that have a profound impact on our economy. It's the four riders of the Apocalypse. I'll start with the most up-to-date: corona. To this end, the ECB has set up a fund of EUR 750 billion. This is in addition to the ECB's regular buy-back programme, which already includes 600 billion. So we are dealing with a total of 1,350 billion. This will bring about a prosperity transfer from Northern European countries to Southern European countries. It is therefore more accurate to speak not of a recovery fund but of a redistribution fund. That Rutte has put pressure on himself to agree to this, the history books will go down as a historical mistake of unprecedented proportions. In their own countries, the support programmes have obviously given SMEs some air to continue to pay staff, but this support remains very limited, because other operating costs, such as rent, continue to go on. The aid packages are focused purely on the short term. The medium and long term promises little good. When companies rely on aid packages for too long, zombie companies are created that have only the right to exist on paper. To top it all off, the government is threatening a new lockdown. Anything that has saved the support measures so far, as good and as bad as it has done, will fade away from the economic armageddon that we will see when catering, shops, businesses, neighbourhood associations and sports clubs are forced to close again massively. Then we don't have to talk about percentage, disks or income figures anymore. The ministers who would take such a decision on their conscience would not only cause economic but also social disastrous consequences. That will have a profound impact on the generations to come. The current corona measures are therefore in all respects disproportionate and insufficiently effective. Of course, we must protect vulnerable groups and avoid the collapse of care capacity. Everyone agrees on that, but there are many smarter measures to achieve that goal, measures that do much less harm to our economy and our society, measures that do not shoot with hail but target certain people and keep the rest of society open. I feel supported by thousands of doctors at home and abroad who have sounded the alarm clock and plead for a radically different policy. Tomorrow I will discuss this extensively in the Corona debate. That is why I am now moving on to the following threat to our prosperity: the absurd climate plans. This horse of the Apocalypse, this second horse, is ridden by jockey Frans Timmermans, European champion, with his stablehandler Diederik Samsom, head of Timmermans' cabinet and responsible for implementing the Green Deal. These are thousands of billions wasted on inefficient wind turbines and solar panels. They do not want to call it \"costs\"; they would be \"investments.\" So your home isolation would be recouped in about 250 years. \"Creative accounting,\" we call it. Mr. Chairman. As long as nuclear energy is excluded for ideological reasons, we are threatening to commit a historic failure of unprecedented proportions. Nuclear energy is clean and cheap and ensures that citizens and businesses no longer have to suffer under expensive and compelling climate requirements. Last week, we were pleased to see that nuclear energy is the future. This will undoubtedly last until March 17, 2021, but unfortunately experience has shown that the VVD election promises after elections are often forgotten again. Nevertheless, a glimmer of hope. But then there's mass immigration. Apart from the disastrous effects it has on culture, it is also a disaster for the economy. So the third horse from the Apocalypse. For why is there never a proper debate on the economic damage caused by mass immigration? We often hear debates about culture, but not often about the economy, which is therefore deeply disrupted. Why not make a thorough analysis of the costs and benefits of the open immigration lock that the Netherlands has become under the Rutte Cabinets over the last ten years? No less than 750,000 people have joined the Netherlands since 2010, often illegal as well. It seems extremely useful to calculate on balance what immigrants have contributed to the Dutch economy after deduction of costs such as housing, benefits, medical care and social side effects. Elsevier calculated a few years ago that the cost of immigration has already risen to 200 billion. These are about the benefits of the Dutch natural gas fields since 1970. We could have been swimming in the money if we had spent those billions better. We could have invested in care, education, defense, housing and security. What a dream country the Netherlands could have been. Unfortunately, the cartel parties have decided to change their policies. VVD, CDA and the other parties that have been in power for the past 40 years have not chosen to do so. We cannot go back, but for the coming years it is possible to change the policy substantially. In any case, we are in favour of stopping all immigration which does not concern people who are going to make a positive contribution to our national economy. We only want people to come to the Netherlands to bring something. Every year the population of our country grows with about 100,000 people. That's about the size of a city like Delft, every year. It can and must not continue like this. Unfortunately, for decades, the government parties have been deaf and blind to the question of how many people can actually live in the Netherlands without the care, housing and our social services succumb because too many people rely on it without contributing to the carrying capacity. And finally, the fourth horse: the geopolitical project to integrate all the national states in Europe into a bureaucratic monster state, the European Union. We can be blind, as the prisoners in the cave that Plato described, or we can simply admit that the economic consequences of a transfer union have been hidden from the citizens. We are completely deceived with orwellian newspeak, in which donations in a bottomless pit are praised as loans, which we would get back with interest. Amounts so large that they can't be comprehended for people to take advantage of each other. It's hundreds of billions. You can't imagine it, but it does happen and it translates into lower purchasing power, into higher taxes and into less freedom. Citizen, who is suddenly seen as full once every four years and then allowed to go to the ballot box, has had to lose the thread regularly because the complicated Brussels regulations were not presented to him in a normal and fair manner. But of course that was precisely the intention of the Europhiles bureaucrats. For what would have happened if the citizen had realized in the voting booth that his pension would disappear like snow before the sun in order to save the pensions of French and Italians? Imagine if in March 2021 the tax authorities, pardon the voters, were to wonder why we should pay for failing governments in southern Europe, or why we should pay for a large informal economy and a low tax morale like in Italy. Worse still, what would happen if we asked the citizens of the Netherlands in a referendum what they thought about this? Or does the government not entrust this freedom to its citizens? Let the Dutch decide for themselves whether they have all these billions left over for a federal Europe. That would be our approach. Because for Dutch savers and for all those who hope to claim our pensions, the artificially low interest rate kept by the ECB is in any case very bad news. The calculation rate, which was once set at 4%, has long since become unfeasible, with the result that many Dutch people have been deprived of a carefree old age. Rob Jetten wants to support Italy financially, otherwise Florentine lovers will not be able to pay for their romantic bunch of flowers from our exporters. However, every bartender knows that sooner or later it will turn out to be an unwise economic choice if you let poor customers drink on the puff without money, here compared to poor countries. I therefore strongly advise Mr Jetten not to continue his career as a pub boss who wishes to continue to donate to his guests indefinitely. Just throwing in some money from your own cash register and then getting a new round paid. Mr. Chairman. According to Prime Minister Rutte, the Netherlands is deeply socialist. However, the problem is that socialists like to spend other people's money. With the best intentions of course, but at some point these resources, earned by hard-working enterprising citizens, are unfortunately up, after which the ideological fairy tale has ended. FvD doesn't believe in such a deep-socialist country. The Netherlands must be able to earn its own money and prosperity, in freedom, without any strings attached to European rules by the EU and the ECB, without undemocratic climate agreements, without imposed immigration quotas, as a conscious and sovereign country. How is that supposed to happen? By first of all supporting SMEs and relaxing regulation. By making work pay again. By lowering taxes and simplifying fees. By not forcing farmers to cut their businesses, but by enabling these professionals to exploit economically profitable businesses and provide our food supply. By making sure that the Netherlands is back on the top of the world in terms of scientific and innovation. By stopping endless subsidy flows in the refugee industry and the climate sector, which are distributed through NGOs and the Postal Code lottery, among others. By providing development aid only if it serves a Dutch interest directly and further significantly reduces with strict controls on efficiency. By building a reliable defense and not living on the pocket of the United States. The Dutch deserve to be free citizens of a sovereign country to make their own decisions and to be able to bring the government to order and adjust through a referendum. That is our view of the financial direction of this government. Thank you."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-09-30-tweedekamer-9.u30", "speech text": "Mr Van der Molen of the CDA Group apparently says that the cabinet does not manage things properly, that it is chaos in the cabinet. It shouldn't get much crazier: the CDA is now going to attack its own cabinet! It's very simple. Mr Van der Molen cites the Committee on the Interior as an example. It is quite simple: if anything comes from the Ministry of the Interior, then the Committee on the Interior deals with it. It can't be any simpler. There's gonna be a law. We'll see who the first signatory is. If that's the Home Secretary, it goes to the Home Affairs Committee. It's as simple as that. But if we are constantly having to talk about everything that we as Members of Parliament get on our plate \"no, this is IT-related,\" the end is lost. We're really creating total chaos here in Lower House. And I still haven't heard the defense of Secretary of State Knops. It's being attacked by its own CDA group. Thank you, Mr President."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-10-01-tweedekamer-7.u58", "speech text": "That's a very weak defense. I'm not suggesting that one investment shouldn't be allowed and the other investment should be. The story is that if you invest without creating new jobs, you just invest, and if you do it in a way that creates new jobs, you can use that arrangement. Then the scheme is really job-related. It's not that complicated at all. I find it funny that part of the defense of a Secretary of State for Finance is not to complicate a settlement. That's a you-bowl of thunder when I look at everything that's constantly being proposed. So again, it is very simple, Mr President. We can simply include in the assumptions that an investment is job-related if it creates jobs. Anyone can still invest, but without the percentage discount. If an investment results in jobs, you can use the two times 2 billion. Sounds like a win-win to everyone."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-10-07-tweedekamer-3.u63", "speech text": "The open standard for safe distance in these emergency laws gives room and a legal basis for this. The same applies to measures that determine how much visit you may receive at home. They are now given a legal basis. This narrows and grinds down the house law contained in the Constitution. That brings me to democratic control. At the heart of our constitutional system is the fact that the Parliament takes part in the content of, participates in and participates in the decision on essential freedom measures through legal rules; on restrictions on our fundamental fundamental rights. So freedom can't be restricted without the consent of parliament. You can't just leave that to the Minister. It concerns far-reaching powers, which affect us all, in the hands of unelected ministers and unelected mayors. I do not see an adequate ID for that at the moment. Because with the version of the emergency law, like the one without amendments, which I would like to stress once again, the Minister of Health is given the power to impose measures on the population, for example on group formation and keeping away from them, by means of so-called ministerial regulations. The Lower House can then discuss this measure and submit motions, after which the Minister is asked to amend the measure or to abandon it altogether. But the minister, the cabinet, can ignore that. So even if the House of Representatives does not agree with the Minister's measures, these measures can continue. In addition, of course, we also have a coalition force, so that questionable measures can always count on striking votes. By the way, the cabinet can always ignore motions that have been adopted and, whether disguised or not, it can be said that it is impossible for all kinds of blurry reasons or that it is extremely difficult to respond to what the motion asks. Every Member of Parliament does have such a tray of adopted motions and commitments that can be called, e-mailed and recalled in any subsequent debate. But do it? Whoa, whoa, whoa, Parliament is given, if the amendment to item No. 30 of GroenLinks is believed to govern the Parliament's right of assent or ratification, which is still the last word. There would be no more decree management. The widely criticised and feared safety net provision of Article 58s comes out. No decree board, no sole rule of the minister, because if the minister wants to announce measures, the Chamber will have a week to reject them or agree to them. That works like this. The Minister invents a restriction of a fundamental right to which this emergency law gives him the opportunity. Parliament must then meet to ratify the measure. If this does not happen, the measure lapses. So, is the expectation, the minister looks out before he introduces anything. That sounds solid, but is it? At least it doesn't reassure me. This is the minister of the rushed balloons, such as the corona app which, as predicted, turns out to be a real privacy disaster in the early test phase, places people quietly in self-quarantine during false alarms and calls for testing even without complaints, while there is no test capacity and the GGD is totally overstretched and overloaded. Next, it is the same minister who points out so-called pretters as culprits for turning his own failing test policy into a chain of wrong decisions and orders people not to be tested without complaints. Bye-bye app, you'd think. No. The law for that nasty app has been passed in the Lower House and also in the Upper Chamber. He's gonna be rolled out nationwide. A failed test balloon by two Chambers cycling, is apparently no problem for this minister. I hold my heart to the open standards and far-reaching possibilities for freedom-limiting measures that this Corona Law offers. After all, as agreed with a number of opposition parties who are about to vote in favour of the law, if there is any immediate danger, the Minister may immediately announce a measure that will enter into force immediately, and Parliament can only refer the measure to the trash after a week. In my view, however, it was precisely the whole point of the Corona Law that this law is necessary for the legal embedding of freedom-limiting measures, because corona poses a direct danger to society, to public health, and in particular to the weak and vulnerable in society. In the media the example of the hospitality closure was given last March. But can the Minister just explain to me very clearly what he thinks is a directly dangerous or an indirectly dangerous COVID-19 situation? And is that gonna be filled out somewhere? Or is that once again a matter for the Minister's discretion in each individual case? In that case, I am afraid to do so, because I can still recall some nasty semantic discussions with this minister, for example about the definition of \"volatile contact\" between a care worker and older proven corona patients in a nursing home. We have had a whole debate here in the Chamber with the Prime Minister about the blunder that RIVM, in the field of source and contact research, has identified as \"close direct contact\" persons who have been within 1.5 metres for more than five minutes. At the same time, this minister tells healthcare workers who are constantly in volatile contact within 1.5 metres throughout the day and have to work with coughing and sneezing corona patients: all of this is fine without personal protective equipment. That's safe, because yes, \"volatile contact,\" how do you mean? While, to date, there is still no sharing with the Chamber where that \"volatile contact\" criterion came from, on the basis of which scientific studies the directive was drawn up stating that personal protective equipment was not necessary, and on the basis of which it was suddenly adapted. These are semantic games the minister's trained in. With these semantic games and this shit with people's health, I'm really done. In the case of the Corona Problem Law, I foresee all the bumping around with terms and restrictions of freedom, which are then, and then again are not, ratified by the Chamber. Can the Minister clearly and clearly define what is directly and indirectly at risk in relation to the measures which he can take under the provisions of this emergency law? We'd better get that straightaway. Speaking of clarity, I refer to Articles 58d and 58e, on the powers of the chairman of the security region and the differentiation and derogations. An amendment from the CDA has already been tabled to that effect. That is what I would like to say briefly about the extension of democratic control over the exercise of powers transferred to the President of the security region. I wholeheartedly support that. But last week there were more criticisms and concerns about these two articles in the Emergency Act, by the VNG, the Aldermen's Association, the Security Council and the Dutch Society of Mayors. They clearly have concerns about local customization, which is made conditional on the Minister's decision to give this power to the mayor. There are concerns about the coordination, enforcement and implementation of the measures. There are concerns about confusion in society about its lack. About the coordinating role of the President of the security region, which seems to be insufficiently anchored. On democratic legitimacy at local level, which is not sufficiently guaranteed. On the maintenance of safe distance and on the formation of groups in the case of students. Finally, there are questions about the interpretation of the autonomous administrative power of municipalities, namely what scope is actually left for that under this emergency law. Mr. Chairman. It is hard for ordinary people to follow, but now that it is also inimitable at this level of security regions and municipalities, I would like to ask the Minister to write a manual specifically for Articles 58d and 58e, a clear roadmap, on what should be done on a decentralised basis with this regulation. I have also spoken to a state law professor about this. He also says that the risk is being taken here, which is in fact inevitable that the layers of government are going to collide. The direction is incredibly clumsy. Can the Minister, therefore, put together a manual with great urgency, but of course with great care? Mr. Chairman. Finally, on Article 58 (1) (a), I would like to say why there is a further piece of age discrimination in this area. What the hell is that for? How far does that go? It goes against Article 1 of the Constitution. I'm also looking at 50PLUS with a oblique eye. Perhaps we could work together to put together another amendment to get that age discrimination out of that article of the law. On the interim article 58g about group formation I will come back to the end. I hear Mrs. Kuik say \"58a.\" Excuse me? I'm on it, Mr. Chairman. On Article 58g, on group formation, I will come back to the end. Article 58o. I welcome the 50PLUS amendment which regulates that nursing homes are no longer in overall lockdown where residents can no longer see any loved or caregiver. I very much support that. On Article 58p concerning passenger transport, I have a specific question for the Minister. Is my lecture that paragraph 2 provides the opportunity to deviate from the fact that people from one household can sit together in a car? I find that rather complicated: exception to exception. The outside guard, the people at home, doesn't understand anything about this. Can the Minister explain clearly in what specific situations he wishes to make use of this possibility and what this will help in the fight against the virus? That's not gonna make it any easier. Shouldn't that exception just come out all the way? I would be happy to table an amendment on that today. Mr. Chairman. I come to Rule 58t, on accountability and information. Paragraph 1 states: \"Our Minister shall send monthly to both Chambers of the States General a reasoned statement of the measures in force under this Chapter.\" Excuse me? That's how I ask the Minister. Monthly? It seems as if the Minister wishes to do us a favour, but I hope the Minister is aware that this article is actually a restriction on the right of the Chamber to information, the well-known Article 68 of the Constitution. A motion of running mate Vice-President Pieter Omtzigt has recently been adopted in Parliament. So this is a cigar out of its own box and quite misplaced. I have an amendment in preparation to restore this. Mr. Chairman. Then I come to the so far draconian corona fines. This includes, among other things, the rattle of Article 68a, the criminal record and the triple stroke of Minister Grapperhaus. I would like to think a little bit more about that. I would like to take a quick look back at the Corona Fine and last month's Grapperhaus debate for the people at home. That was an embarrassing debate on the violation of all kinds of corona measures by the Minister of Justice and Security, by the guests at his own wedding and not to mention by his Secretary of State Ankie Broekers-Knol, whose role in all this was hardly or hardly addressed to my stupid surprise. However, as far as I am concerned, the Minister's credibility was torn apart, and he took the credibility of the corona measures into his trap. And he put enforcers in an impossible position. Boa's stopped spending a lot of money on fines. The Chamber gave another boost, and the corona fine policy, which was previously unspeakable and steadfastly harsh, is now on the move. At the urgent request of the Court, the high fines for violating the one-and-a-half-meter measure, as well as the notes on the judicial document, will be removed. It has also been announced that, in accordance with motions adopted by the Chamber, regulations will be made to remove the registrations of violations of regional covide emergency regulations which have been included in the judicial documentation. I ask the Minister of Justice and Security what is going on with these regulations to remove the notes. And does the Minister also intend to reduce the already imposed \u20ac390 corona fines to the amount of \u20ac95, as will be regulated by law for future corona fines? Mr. Chairman. In particular, in the first months of the corona crisis, approximately 17,000 criminal orders were issued for a violation of a rule in the covide emergency regulations, such as the fine for the violation of the safe distance standard or the one and a half meter measure, and a violation of the ban on group formation that is closely related to this. In the meantime, 6.872 oppositions have been made against these corona fines. Before that, in the last few days, the first people were in court. The day before yesterday 22 people fought their corona fine at the canton court in Arnhem. By far the majority of people are not assisted in their corona case by an attorney. They therefore stand without a lawyer, alone in court, leaving legal defenses undisputed. I'm very sorry about that. The most up-to-date political situation, such as no criminal record and possibly a lower fine, was also discussed at the hearing. What does the Minister of Justice and Security think about most people without lawyers being brought to justice? People who, due to a corona fine, have to appear before the canton court do not, in principle, receive compensation for a lawyer because it is a motto: for the canton court you have to be able to defend yourself. This is often about traffic fines and other minor penalties. But these corona fines are basic discussions, discussions about whether an emergency regulation has been able to serve as a basis for restricting fundamental rights. That's what we're talking about in the Chamber today, and that's why we're dealing with this emergency bill. Anyone who wishes to take a lawyer to the canton court after a criminal offence and cannot afford to do so can in principle ask the Legal Aid Council to make an exception. But hardly anyone knows that. The argument may be that this is a particular factual or legally complex case, and that is the case in this case. Does the Minister agree with me that, now that there is a fundamental state-of-the-art discussion in this case, people need a lawyer in corona fine cases? Will the Minister undertake to discuss this matter with the Legal Assistance Council as soon as possible? Will he also promise that people who want a lawyer to assist them in a corona fine case but cannot pay them will receive compensation, as is the case with criminal cases? Mr. Chairman. Now that a regulation is being drafted to delete the note on the judicial document also for the corona fines already imposed, I ask the Minister whether he will do the same for the amount of fines already imposed. That seems fair to me. Does the Minister agree with me and, if so, how will he achieve that? Mr. Chairman. Just going through those corona fines. [[Sentence could not be parsed: De minister had het tijdens het debat met deze Kamer ineens over een drieslag van aanspreken, waarschuwen en pas daarna beboeten.]] The Minister was very much in favour of this. During the debate on 2 September, he said that police and boas enforcement policy was based, and has always been, on these three strikes. It would also be in the work instruction of the boas. Which one he didn't know exactly, but the so-called three-stroke was definitely in it. It would still be sent to the Chamber, but the letter of the Chamber on the enforcement of the corona rules does not come back to those three strokes. Nor have I been allowed to receive a boa directive in this letter of inquiry, despite my repeated enquiries at the interrupting microphone. The Minister also said, in reply to my questions, that the prosecution will review the three-step decision when assessing the criminal decisions and not prosecute them. I quote the Minister: 'There is the first filter between the Public Prosecutor's Office of Fines, which the Public Prosecutor's Office says has not been properly followed in our view'. But now it turns out that in the first corona cases last week at the court of the Central Netherlands in Utrecht, the prosecutor firmly distanced himself from that three-stroke of Minister Grapperhaus. The prosecutor explicitly and unequivocally distanced himself from the three strokes of appeal, warning and enforcement mentioned by Minister Grapperhaus. He said at the sitting: 'This is incorrect and not a policy from which rights can be derived'. The judge finally said: \"A cop or boa can give a warning for an offense, but it is not mandatory.\" How does the Minister feel about that? In what light should we see its repeatedly firmly laid down three strikes? Mr. Chairman. This is a very important point. A criminal attorney with whom I had contact during the debate about these statements suggested that you, Minister, made up this three-stroke on the spot to save your own ass. Also, you would not be punishable because the intention to violate the corona rules lacked the intention. If it's not my intention to run a red light but I do it by mistake and get flashed, I get a fine, because I'm committing an offense. In the case of a felony, the intention is an argument. I also asked the Minister during that infamous debate: should the Minister agree with me that the dependence on your intention, that intention criterion, goes against our order of offences and crimes? It just didn't add up, the minister was just saying something. Once again, he misinformed the Chamber. I think that's very gracious, Mr. Chairman. Indeed, the Minister was absolutely certain that it should be in the intention of the offender to violate the corona rules. Otherwise, the prosecution would not be prosecuted and the judge would also have to come to the conclusion that no corona fine would be imposed. But the D.A., through the district attorney's office, said in a court hearing, \"that intention of the offender or the deliberate committing of the offence does not play any role in the assessment of the offender's criminality.\" I'm looking at the Minister in the eye, because this really isn't possible. The Minister is the Minister of Justice and Security, the Minister who makes the rules himself. He repeatedly violates his own corona measures and lies to the Chamber about them. When the Chamber calls him to account, he sucks out an all-encompassing boa-drift and an intensity criterion on the spot. Mr. Chairman. I would like to remind the Minister what Mr. Corstens, former chairman of the Supreme Court, the highest judge in the Netherlands, thought of your actions. In any case, his handbook on Dutch criminal law law had to teach the Utrecht law student a piece. I have a great deal of respect for him. I'm sure the Minister remembers what this lawyer said, so I don't have to quote him. But aren't you ashamed? Mr. Chairman. I'd like to help the Minister. I have an amendment in preparation which incorporates the three-stroke of the Minister and the requirement of the intention to violate the corona measures into this emergency law. Because, after the determination of the Minister, I can only conclude that this is a considerable omission which must be restored immediately."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-10-07-tweedekamer-8.u106", "speech text": "I didn't say he made them just for Rawagade and Celebes. I have said that, of course, around and after Bot's statements, this has been relevant developments, as well as the fact that the picture is now building up that there has indeed been excessive violence during the police actions. He also did not apologize for the fact that the Netherlands has made an attempt to maintain the colony, but for the fact that this has been part of that history. If you want to work together on a future relationship... I shall leave Mr Bosma for a moment to assess the need for this on the Indonesian side. I have different views on that. Apart from that, I think it is appropriate that you make an attempt if you come to the conclusion at some point that things have happened there that cannot, in an otherwise self-defense part of our history. Afterwards, of course, we have very different views about colonization and so on. I think that's different in all parties now. But from history as we knew it then, that in itself was a position to be defended by the Schermerhorn, Beel and Drees Cabinets. The fact is that this happened during those actions. Then I think it makes sense for you to pronounce that, if we know and find it, and if the king is there."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-10-26-eerstekamer-6.u55", "speech text": "Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Every bird sings the way it's beaked. The same goes for the bird of the Party for the Animals. The bird is in front of you, and when it comes to talking, perhaps you would expect me to make an extensive legal argument on issues we have already discussed. Mr Janssen has already made that speech, and he is also very well-spoken in that area. So you're not gonna hear that from me. I'll talk about other things. I am going to talk today about the democratic deficit, self-mutilation and evergreens. First of all, I would like to raise another important issue. This concerns the balancing framework laid down in Article 58b of the Act. Perhaps a little legal, I say to the ministers. The aim of this article is to combat the epidemic. Accordingly, the measure should only be taken if it is necessary, in view of the seriousness of the threat to public health, to minimise and proportionate the exercise of fundamental rights. I asked the VWS Minister whether I read correctly that Article 58b states that the measure should not be taken if it has not been scientifically established that that measure will be effective. This is an important question for practical application. To my fear, his answer was: no, that cannot be inferred from that. In other words, a measure which has not been established to be appropriate to combat the epidemic can be imposed by the Minister. Mr. Chairman. The text of Article 58b has been incorporated into the law on the basis of an amendment accepted unanimously. I read in the second paragraph that powers are only applied if they are necessary in view of the seriousness of the threat to public health. It clearly says \"is necessary\" and not \"if the Minister considers that measure appropriate.\" Both the judiciary and science agree that the three basic requirements of necessity, proportionality and subsidiarity also lay down the requirement of suitability. I quote Professor Janneke Gerards from her contribution to the collection The principle of proportionality of art. 3:4 Awb and European law: \"To be able to speak of a proportionate decision, this decision must first of all be an effective means of achieving the objectives pursued by the decision. The requirement of fitness.\" I read here that the decision must first of all be an effective means. This means that if scientists find that a measure is not established that it effectively contributes to the fight against the epidemic, it must not be taken. It would then be contrary to Article 58b, second paragraph. But according to the answer to my previous written question, the Minister sees it differently. If the Minister already states that he explains Article 58b (2) in such a way that he reserves the right to take a measure that is not scientifically considered effective, then we have a problem. He then nibbles off the sharpness of the legislative text and brings everything back into his own sphere of competence, which was not the intention of the authors of the amendment. Our group wishes to make this clear. It concludes from Article 58b that freedom-limiting measures should only be applied if generally accepted scientific standards are sufficiently established that those measures will be effective. Is that right? I'd like a response from the Minister. The Minister agrees with us that consideration should be given not only to the importance of the threat to public health, but also to the importance of preventing unemployment, loneliness, damage to the living environment, learning disadvantages, greater inequality of opportunity and other general interests. However, those who read the text of Article 58b do not find this balancing framework. The text merely highlights the importance of combating the epidemic. This interest is, in principle, a priority, although the proportionality test may prevent conflicting interests from doing so. These conflicting interests are the interests of the citizens who are affected and to whom fundamental rights belong. We have received thousands of very concerned e-mails and letters from those citizens. If the exercise of the fundamental rights of those citizens is restricted, the second paragraph (c) of Article 58b states that that restriction must comply with the requirements of proportionality and subsidiarity. Thus, if the number of people allowed to come together is limited, churchgoers may hinder in their freedom of religion Article 6 of the Constitution.................................................................................................................................................... Or it may hinder demonstrators in their freedom of assembly and demonstration (Article 7 of the Constitution). The introduction of the one-and-a-half-metre society could generally restrict citizens' right to privacy, as provided for in Article 8 of the Constitution. That limitation must not be disproportionate at all times. Article 58b, second paragraph (c), deals only with the limitation of the exercise of such fundamental rights by citizens. The legal framework does not include the need to assess the importance of combating the epidemic in conjunction with other general interests which should also be addressed by the public authorities. According to the second paragraph of Article 58b (c), it is only a possible disproportionate restriction on the exercise of fundamental rights by citizens. That review framework does not require the inclusion of objectives other than the objective of combating the epidemic, such as the objective of promoting adequate employment, protection and improvement of the environment, social and cultural development and adequate and sound education, etc. Mr. Chairman. The one-dimensional character of the law is easy to illustrate. Take the requirement of 1.5 meters away and the maximum number of persons of 30 who may be present in a theatre hall. The 1.5 meter distance limits the citizen-theatre visitor in his fundamental right. Review under the conditions laid down in Article 58 (2) (c) may lead to the result that that restriction complies with the proportionality requirement. Then the trade-off is done, and rightfully. The fact that only 30 people are allowed to sit in the theatre does not affect any of the citizens' fundamental rights. Therefore, the proportionality assessment required in Article 58b (2) (c) does not relate to this. The adverse effect of the measure on the general interest of cultural development will not be taken into account in the consideration required under Article 58b. Or take students and students who are no longer able to attend physical education. If this leads to disadvantage in learning and to deterioration in the quality of education, it is not a violation of a fundamental right to which Article 58b (2) (c) refers. A disproportionate balance of interests cannot then be demonstrated. Mr. Chairman. The aim of combating the epidemic and reducing the threat to public health is the law's sole objective, whereas it is precisely to what extent that objective is justified in relation to other objectives which the public authorities should pursue in the public interest. The legal formulation used in the design creates a tunnel where other societal goals are excluded. As a result, there is no legal obligation to consider these other objectives as equivalent in principle. Mr. Chairman. In the wake of the first sudden corona wave, it was understandable that at that time the government could only think of one goal: protection of public health in a narrow sense. In the meantime, however, it is clear that such a one-dimensional tunnel legislation is not adequate and that it also increasingly encounters social resistance. In the NRC of 9 October, even the directors of the Central Planning Bureau, the Planning Office for the Environment and the Social and Cultural Planning Office called on the government to focus on more than just slowing down the corona virus and reducing direct economic damage during the corona crisis. That broader balancing framework should be laid down in this law. Mr. Chairman. One question. Does the Group of the Party of Animals think it right that Article 58b, second paragraph (c) refers exclusively to the balance of interests in relation to measures which restrict the exercise of fundamental rights by citizens? Isn't that what it says? We would like to know how the Minister sees it. And the following question: does the Minister agree with the Group of the Party of Animals that the legal framework in Article 58b is therefore too limited? Mr. Chairman. I promised to talk about self-mutilation. That's about this house. The law grants virtually blank powers to ministers who are given the power to take decisive action. In order to ensure democratic control, provisions are included which provide that what ministers wish to regulate must be submitted in advance to both chambers of the States General. The democratic accountability applies both to the Lower House and to the Upper Chamber. A government or minister is dependent on the trust of both chambers, with which it is established that, in terms of the functioning of democracy, both chambers occupy an equal place. In technical terms, there is a difference that the First Chamber does not have the right of initiative and amendment, but that does not prejudice the principle that both Chambers have an equivalent position as regards democratic accountability. Now, by agreeing to this bill, the First Chamber should accept that the democratic control introduced by the amendment in the law as a guarantee against the creation of violations of fundamental rights to be determined by ministers alone would be the sole responsibility of the House of Representatives. We in this House are therefore about to have our own power to prevent ministers from acting alone, cutting off our position of democratic control. That has never been shown in parliamentary history and we should never agree to it, as far as the Animal Party is concerned. It is not imaginable, but it is evident that other groups in the First Chamber would agree to such self-mutilation. The information provided by the Council of State does not make this any different, quite the contrary. On the contrary, it strengthens the conviction that the right granted to the Lower House in Article 58c (2) and (3) must also be granted to the Upper Chamber. The Council of State had been asked to examine the arrangements laid down in the amendment \"from a legal and state point of view.\" He concluded that the regime was not contrary to the Constitution and that the legal figure chosen by law had been used before. The Council of State should have left it at that. However, he spoke unsolicited about the question of whether it is justifiable that only the Second Chamber should have the right of assent. Our group considers this to be very inappropriate. The conclusion of the Council of State is then incomprehensible. He pointed out that the First Chamber had no right of initiative and amendment, and that, I quote, 'incoming legislative proposals can only be adopted in full or rejected'. \"In that light,\" the quote continues, \"and in view of the speed of action to be taken,\" the Council of State then considers it \"defendable\" to restrict the First Chamber in its democratic control power. But, Mr President, if the ministerial regulation is offered in accordance with the bill, then the House of Representatives can only say yes or no. Then it is absolutely irrelevant whether the Court has the right of initiative and amendment. And if both chambers have to decide within one week, the same week, what does that do to the speed? If the House of Representatives has a right of assent for a week, then there will not be a week if the House of Representatives has to agree in the same week? The arguments of the Council of State are wrong. And that is not a good thing, especially now that many citizens are suspicious of this law. Mr. Chairman. Our group would like to hear from the Minister whether he agrees with her that if the right of assent is granted to both Chambers within the same week, there will be no unacceptable delay that would not be discussed if only the Lower House had the right to assent. I'd like a response. It can't be that the First Chamber is putting itself out of play when it comes to controlling ministerial arrangements. This creates an unacceptable democratic deficit. Mr. Chairman. I come now to another democratic deficit. I noticed that we are the only ones who have pointed this out. It's not an insignificant matter. On June 16, 2020, the Federation of Medical Specialists and the KNMG adopted a Triage Roadmap. In the final phase of the so-called black scenario, according to the script, \"will be switched to triage according to considerations that lie outside the medical domain.\" But that triage will be carried out by doctors on the basis of non-statutory criteria, which are not medical. Our group has asked whether the Minister agrees with us that criteria for that final stage should be laid down by the government. The answer to our questions on this point does not, in the opinion of our group, give any clarity. On the one hand, the Minister seems to suggest that the definition of criteria outside the medical domain can be left to the profession, but on the other hand the Minister acknowledges that there may be a task for the legislator to clarify that there can be no triage only on the basis of age. We have two questions. If, at any point in time, ic's are full and the triage can no longer take place on the basis of medical considerations, is it not necessary in a democratic rule of law for the legislator to determine who is to be given priority on the basis of transparent and verifiable rules? And shouldn't measures covid-19 provide a basis for this in the Temporary Law? I'd like a clear answer from the Minister. And I'll continue. If that phase enters and there are no triage rules laid down by the government, isn't the expectation that patients' relatives will discuss with doctors who are self-sufficient, on the basis of non-medical considerations, refusing patients on the ic? Shouldn't there even be physical protest in hospitals if the doctors fail to convince the family of the fairness of a decision? I would also like a response from the Minister. Mr President, I come to the end of my speech. I promised I'd talk about evergreens. Minister De Jonge spoke to me about evergreens in the debate in the House of Representatives. That was in the debate with the Group of the Party of Animals. He was referring to the problem of mink. This sector is, by the way, more like a 'nevergreen'. The sector is based purely on money and pride, where defenseless animals are gassed for their fur. An amendment prohibiting the professional breeding of mink due to public health risks had broad support in the House of Representatives, but was eventually not adopted. The Minister also takes the view, when answering our group's questions in the First Chamber, that there is no need for a regulation in this law on that point, because both the Animal Health and Welfare Act and the Public Health Act would include powers that could be used to impose a breeding ban. I studied both laws and I have to conclude that the Minister is wrong. There is no provision in the Public Health Act that provides a basis for banning the keeping of mink or other animals that COVID-19 can transfer. The Animal Health and Welfare Act does not confer powers relating to the public health of humans. Combating the spread of COOVID-19 from animal to human is not a subject regulated by that law. Nor can the ban on breeding which can be imposed under Article 55 of that law be based on the importance of preventing human contamination. Other provisions of that law do not provide a basis for a breeding ban to prevent the spread of COOVID-19 to humans. Does the Minister agree with our group? If so, does he agree with us that a basis for such a breeding ban on animals that are detectable for COVID-19 or any other zoonosis with pandemic threat, which can form a reservoir for that virus and which can transfer that virus to humans, should be included in the Temporary Law measures covid-19? Mr. Chairman. The corona measures currently in force, such as the closure of hotels, the ban on team sports, etc., are based solely on risk avoidance. It is established that mink farms pose a risk for the spread of COOVID-19."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-10-27-eerstekamer-11.u8", "speech text": "Mr. Chairman. Ten years of Cabinet Rutte. The last budget of this cabinet and perhaps also the last budget that this Prime Minister has submitted. Corona has turned everything upside down, including the budgetary policy of Rutte I, II and III. In the last year, the savings have been turned around, saving for nine years. Nine years of economy and then in one year the pot is empty again. I'd like to compliment the Prime Minister. Thanks to so much economy in the past, the first blows to the economy were taken and many households were saved a financial death toll. But, to some extent, the cuts have laid the foundations for the problems now. Think about the staff shortages and the capacity problems in hospitals. Corona couldn't be foreseen, but the current problems with additional pressure on care are. How does the Prime Minister look at that now? We know his image that vision is an elephant that takes away sight. I'm afraid this was one of his most clear statements. The Prime Minister is a guide without a tomtom, a tambour-ma\u00eetre without a staff. He's not in front of the band, he's in between. Where we come out, we'll see. Such an orchestra loses its way and so does the melody. The enthusiasm on the street then turns into booing, the happy march in a flute concert. I think Prime Minister Rutte is the most pragmatic Prime Minister we've ever had, although Lubbers could do something about it. D66 chose the pragmatism as a course when he was founded. For D66 Rutte has become the perfect role model: without principles, in everything reasonable and no idea where we come from. Can the Prime Minister explain to us why he didn't become a list leader of D66? He will say: yes, but Mrs Kaag already has them. Well, maybe they'll need it at the CDA later. A guide without course: that also turned out to be Corona. This debate is not about that, of course it is about yesterday. There is much to say about what has happened in policy terms. The point I want to make is that we did not get a policy where the various interests were visibly weighed against each other, medical, economic, social, educational and psychological, to name but a few. In fact, after reversing the treasury, fortunately, Minister Hoekstra, for the benefit of the economy, was mainly directed from the experience of hospitals. Even nursing care hardly came into the picture. Previously, we had the same climate scenario. In The Hague, a number of stakeholders sat at important tables. There was no room for those who disagree and those who are entitled to pay it all: the citizens. So the shortest deadlines and the most ambitious plans came on the menu. What about the Prime Minister? He looked away. All those who hoped for some more nuance, on a little more empathy with the household wallet looked in vain at the Prime Minister. He looked enthusiastically at so many plans, but a wrinkle of care for the living room was not there. Sometimes the Prime Minister seems like a bus driver who sits in the back of the bus himself. Then we're not getting anywhere. What's the ten-year harvest of Rutte? The image of society is not beautiful. The tone is louder, there is more cynicism and anger. The word \"rage\" appears in the newspaper ten times a day. Violence is increasing, both in organised crime and among young people. Whole neighborhoods aren't safe anymore. This is particularly terrible for older people, but also for young people, of course. Prime Minister Rutte, where were your initiatives? We still allow many refugees, but we do not have enough homes for them or for our own citizens. Scarce drives up the price. There are hundreds of thousands of houses too few. Housing shortage was a word from the sixties, but is now in use again. What happened, Prime Minister? We do build windmills, but there is not enough space for houses and there are more and more ecological constraints. Of course ecology is also important, but all these things do not go together. Now refugees are in shelters for years and young Dutch people are not sheltered anywhere. Where was the Prime Minister? The Netherlands is one of the most active narcostates in the world. Mr Knapen spoke about it in detail this morning. In rural areas there are invisible production sites of party drugs. We import and export billions of dollars worth of drugs. Meanwhile, we continue to romanticize its use with coffeeshops and nitrous balloons. It looked like the Leidseplein in Amsterdam sometimes fairground with all those colored balloons and the authority that looked at them smiling. Prime Minister, what the hell are we doing? Then international. We had enough money, but the NATO 2% standard for defence is still too much to ask for. There is a great deal of division in Europe. Instead of the Netherlands becoming a reconciler, we polarize. What's in it for us? Why, Prime Minister, do we not assume the responsibility that suits us internationally? That means paying for what you agreed on in defense and bringing together parties as constructive strength instead of crowing the resistance. Do you have a view on this, Prime Minister? Mr. Chairman. Then the pensions, I'm afraid I can't avoid it. Minister Koolmees has made an agreement, but no one knows what the results are. For the years to come, the dark clouds of discounts are hanging over the heads of 3 million pensioners, which is absurd, unnecessary and unjust. Look at the vision I was allowed to put on the table on behalf of 50PLUS for years. For workers, fortunately, the necessary steps have been taken in recent years to strengthen purchasing power. Not only did tax relief, but most collective agreements also improved considerably, although the crisis has reduced it again. Almost all older people have been seeing their purchasing power decline for years, even because the elderly discount is barely increased. Worse still, they are offered no hope and no perspective. The thunderstorms of reductions in pensions are getting darker and lingering longer and longer. My group does not think these reductions are acceptable and calls for indexation to begin. I'm considering a second-term motion on this. The delay in indexing must also finally be paid out. This is good for the economy and for tax revenue and it does not cost the State and the Minister of Finance a penny. On the contrary. I urge the Prime Minister to take the initiative now and to show that he wants to be the patron of all those people. There are now 3 million people who have made an effort and who now have to wait and see how society treats them. Please at least have a vision for those people 50PLUS is so concerned about. It was known that the introduction of the new system would take a long time. This does not happen until 2027, five years after the introduction of the new Pension Act. That law will not be filed until mid 2021 and will have to be in the Official Journal by the end of 2021. There is still a big open end and nothing has been agreed on the transitional period until 2027. Transitional rights are always very difficult, but in this case completely. Indeed, until 2027, the existing financial supervisory framework will continue to apply, with an accounting rate of 0%. Social partners now demand that there be a separate transitional allowance for pension funds. Minister Koolmees is prepared to do so, but only for funds that intend to move to the new system. The refusers come in the penalty class of 15% discount and large premium increase. I call that pure blackmail. Mr. Chairman. The 50PLUS Lower House Group has a better alternative to all funds. It is rapidly submitting an initiative legislative proposal for an accounting rate of at least 2% in order to avoid discounts and allow indexing. Finally, Mr President. Depth is the loss of the Tax Administration, once one of the most excellent services of the government: accurate, legitimate and careful. I myself was politically responsible for that service. It's been a pleasure. Now, 40 years later, he's almost totaled. It is precisely the service that has access to every wallet and to every cash box in society that needs to be oiled and reliable, including with the child allowance. In the deconfiture of the Tax Administration, the state was struck in its heart. For a subsequent cabinet, two Finance Ministers are Minister Hoekstra of Finance hears this, I suppose perhaps part of the solution. A thesaurial minister for monetary and financial-economic policy, and one for both the state budget and taxes. It is time for the portfolio of tax legislation and implementation at ministerial level to be represented on a weekly basis in the Council of Ministers. Finally, Mr President. I would like to hear from the Prime Minister a constructive response to our proposals. The voters will decide on the final report of this cabinet and of the Prime Minister. If the Prime Minister wants to move on, we are counting on a few more permanent points on the shore. You'll be safer on board with him. I'm very curious about the answers."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-10-27-eerstekamer-11.u63", "speech text": "I can see that. After the United Kingdom, we are traditionally seen as one of the most transatlantic-oriented countries. We are traditionally highly oriented towards Canada and America. For me, this transatlantic link is really the second cornerstone of our foreign policy, alongside the strong European cooperation. That's one of the reasons I always say two things in Washington. The first is: use us as a gateway to Europe. Of course, we are much smaller than England, but we are the most transatlantic. Use the Netherlands to understand what is happening in the European Union. We can point that out. We can help with that, too. We can build bridges. Then the second. We will be discussing NATO expenditure in a moment. We must be careful that America does not think that NATO is there as some kind of historical obligation after the Second World War. This NATO is there because it would be very damaging if Russia were to have great influence in this part of Europe, not only for us, of course, but also for American interests. NATO in Europe is also forward defense for the Americans. That's the kind of dialogue we have with America. We are trying to be that doorway for the Americans to Europe, at least that is our ambition. They make their own choices, of course, but these relations are excellent, also with Donald Trump's government. And within Europe, of course, we are the classic voice of free trade, of international orientation and of the Europe that can take pride in acting on the international stage. People also look at the Netherlands when it comes to such subjects. But apart from pontificating on that, I find it particularly interesting to look at those who are traditionally the furthest away from us: France. With this President, we are now able to make joint agreements on a number of occasions, and these are the European agreements."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-10-28-tweedekamer-3.u90", "speech text": "Mr. Chairman. Here I am, in the House of Representatives. A special place and the heart of our democracy. I have to say, as a Brabant boy from a Catholic church village, it's impressive to be standing here. I stand here fighting for a world in which everyone can be themselves, without limiting the other to be themselves. For a world where everyone gets the chance to pursue their own dreams. For a world where it's safe to dream about love and the future. For a world where we take care of each other when things go a little bit less with the other. In which we look at each other and where we do justice to the defenseless and the orphans and in which we stand up for the oppressed and the weak. Today we are discussing the Foreign Trade and Development Cooperation Budget 2021. It is a budget with a cut of about EUR 110 million. In addition, this minister is placing a mortgage on the future by raising money. To put it bluntly, it's half a billion dollars. And this while the weakest will only get heavier. Now we're dealing with corona, and the economic crisis is already signing off. And we are not even talking about the effects of climate change. We have a strong public sector, with deep pockets, and a well-functioning civil society. This gives us a solid basis for dealing with these crises. Still, it is not easy to get through it together, let alone if you grow up in the slums of Nairobi, or in Kakuma, one of the many large UNHCR refugee camps in Africa. Or in Uganda, where you're not even safe when you're a girl, woman, or Ihbti person. No, if I've learned anything in my upbringing, it's that you look back at each other, that you don't let each other down when the need is greatest, but that you try to give the others support in the back. That means, in this case, in this budget, not cutting back on the poorest, the defenseless, the oppressed and the weak. Unfortunately, this minister, and this cabinet with her, is choosing these cuts. It is precisely now, at this time, when there are sandbags full of money ready to support large companies and the flying sector, that this department is being cut back, making it even more difficult for the most vulnerable: I cannot understand that. By the way, we are still in the dark about where the blows are going to fall. Because this minister chooses to push through the cuts until after the elections. A rather unsympathetic legacy to pass on to your successor, I'd say. Mr. Chairman. I understand that it is a tradition to look back at the past period in the last budget of a cabinet. Today, Mrs Kaag is Minister for three years and two days. As a group, we have followed the words and actions of this minister in recent years. We haven't seen much concrete. I wonder what this minister himself is most proud of. What three things has Minister Kaag managed politically in recent years? What does she see as her legacy? I'd like to hear it from this minister. Mr. Chairman. Solidarity is not free. Words can be grand, compelling and inspiring, but if you don't do what you say, at the end of the day there will be nothing but silence and hunger and violence and hopelessness. It costs money to invest in a world where we let everyone out and don't let anyone down. GroenLinks understands that like no other. We are therefore prepared to invest so that we can contribute to a world in which people have a future. Mr. Chairman. Together with colleagues Van den Hul of the PvdA and Alkaya of the SP, I have therefore tabled an amendment to this budget, in conjunction with our joint counter-budget, to add 500 million to the budget for external trade and development cooperation, to reverse this terrible mortgage on the future and the planned cuts. It may be unusual to shift such large amounts per amendment, but it is vital for people in developing countries that we do. Look at the positions of women, girls and minorities. They're under pressure. Girls are not allowed to go to school anymore, causing them to lose education, nutrition and safety. Lhbti people are increasingly marginalized, and sexual and reproductive rights are being pushed aside in many countries. Unfortunately, this Minister is planning to cut millions more on that. A kick after all those women, girls and lhbti-people who fight for ownership of their own body and sexuality. That is what we are trying to fix in this budget. But I wonder why the Minister made this choice. Hundreds of millions of people have to survive from less than \u20ac2 a day. Providing a social safety net via cash transfers is an effective way to help these people. Since we first brought this to this house a year ago, the Minister has become increasingly enthusiastic about it. That's great, but can the Minister explain how she's using cash transfers? Could she perhaps also give her opinion on the amended motion for a resolution tabled by myself and Mr Van den Hul? Mr. Chairman. The free press is also hit hard. Over the past few months, I have drawn attention to this more often. We stand on our backs when the NOS can no longer be identified on the street. We remember the murder of journalist Khashoggi and the indignation about this. We see that Iran and Russia are again interfering with the elections in the United States, and we are quite rightly outraged by this. Mr. Chairman. But when it comes to newspapers and media houses falling down in Bangladesh and Uganda, it stays quiet. A free press is crucial to promoting democracy and good governance, and provides reliable information, especially in these uncertain times. Does the Minister also see the importance and role of the free press? I get the impression not, because two weeks ago we received the letter from the minister in which she writes that she no longer wants to support the press. Why not? I'll ask the Minister. Why is she dropping the free press so hard in this time of year? What else can she do to correct this misstep? I hope that is more than the patch that was taped, which Minister Blok informed us about yesterday. Mr. Chairman. To achieve the Sustainable Development Goals it is very important that everything we do here strengthens each other. Take climate change. Through climate finance, the Netherlands helps poor countries deal with the consequences, but at the same time, through export credit insurance, we contribute just as much to investments in the fossil industry worldwide. Guarantees of 1.5 billion a year. That's not consistent, is it? What has this minister done to reduce these fossil subsidies? For example, in Sweden, fossil export credit insurance is prohibited from 2022. Does this cabinet want to follow this Swedish example? Or take the soybean industry. We see that the Amazon is being cut down and burned down for the soy industry, rainforest hood that Dutch companies are directly involved in, for soy brought to the Netherlands to feed our pigs, supported by our embassies on the spot. At the same time, we are concerned about maintaining the rainforest and sustainable wood production. Or take the fishing. We support African fishermen with better boats and nets, so that they can provide for their own existence. On the other hand, however, we accept that large Dutch and other European companies obtain the fees in the same African waters. Then you're not coherent, are you? Does the Minister not think it is time to stop blindly relying on the goodness of companies and finally face the truth? Isn't it time to stop being naive? Where has this minister been critical of all those companies which, in her view, \"just want to be responsible\" in NRC? Mr. Chairman. I see a world in which Shell has been miserable with the oil mess in Nigeria over the past few years and where Van Oord's corruption in Angola came to this minister's office. Or Parlevliet & Van der Plas, which with bribery obtained the fees in Namibia. There is almost no major corruption scandal to be found where a Dutch e.g. does not show up somewhere. As far as tax avoidance is concerned, the Netherlands is doing too little, which means that developing countries also miss billions of tax revenues. I sincerely wonder: how critical is this minister of these companies and how critical has she been over the past period? I'd like to hear it from her. What has this minister done? What about the implementation of our adopted motion to seek advice from the WRR on achieving sustainable development goals with a specific focus on policy coherence? As far as I am concerned, it is now time for binding legislation on corporate social responsibility at international level, but I have the impression that the Chamber should take the initiative. Mr. Chairman. The world improves by the example we are and the actions we do, not by our own words and opinions. Thank you."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-10-29-tweedekamer-6.u45", "speech text": "It is indeed a good point for the Presidium to standardize that. But welcome, anyway. Thank you for joining us. Then about the law. Many of the previous speakers spoke mainly about citizens. I want to say something about journalism. Sometimes there are some points of light in Dutch journalism. One example is the way in which Mr Pieter Klein of RTL has got himself into the famous case of the surcharges, which, of course, has enormous repercussions, as we see every day. He is rightly praised for this. There is, especially in progressive circles, very much released on conspiracy theories and conspiracy thinkers. My party was thrown before the feet to believe in conspiracies regarding the Wilder Process. Then everyone said: those crazy PVV's believe that the Public Prosecutor's Office is conspiring with The Hague politicians... ha ha ha! But then, thanks to the same Mr. Klein, the pieces surfaced and what turned out to be? The conspirators were just right. There was indeed just a conspiracy. The Public Prosecutor even discussed the press releases with the Ministry of Justice. It was worse than we thought. And how did that get up there? Thanks to the WOB. Forty years old, but apparently alive. My conclusion is that the WOB works. Maybe not optimal, but it just works; it works. Today we are discussing the Open Government Act, the proposed successor to the WOB. The Netherlands was one of the first countries to have such a law 40 years ago. In 2009, it was Minister Hirsch Ballin who did not sign the Treaty of Troms\u00f8 because that was actually unnecessary. We were a lot further. Thanks and tributes to the initiators who are now in trade-K. It took some parliamentary archaeological digging to find out the history of this initiative law. It goes back to Mariko Peters of GroenLinks. Many others have looked into it. My group voted in favour at the time. It's wonderful that both gentlemen have taken over the defense. It's worth a compliment in itself. Congratulations! We see that Mrs Peters' original proposal has now been considerably weakened. I understand, because that's how it goes. The Second Chamber was in favour, but the First Chamber was against. So what do you do? You either throw the proposal in the trash or you're gonna work on it. The keys are done. Quite a bit has disappeared from the original Woo. By the way, do we say \"woo\" or \"woo\"?"}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-11-04-tweedekamer-7.u120", "speech text": "That is all constructive, but it is three different discussions. One discussion is about the future of health care. Indeed, we want loving care and if possible close to home. This means that you look again at the division of tasks between the GP plus plus, the one and a half care, the hospital, etc. That is a longer-term discussion. That doesn't even have to do with costs, because costs are rising anyway. They're going up like hell. Also in this cabinet period billions and billions and billions will be added for health care. There is another problem, namely that with this high cost increase you have to keep an eye on how to prevent it from being at the expense of other expenses, such as education, defence or the police. But it's just a fact: health care is precious, but it's also precious to all of us. That's one discussion, but it's about the longer term. There's a really more complicated story than closing down hospitals. It's not that simple. Basically, you try to organize that care well and in a smart way close to people. Let's get back to this debate. In addition, Wilders has two sensible things to do. At least I hear two different things in that. On the one hand, what are you doing in case of what I just mentioned, disasters or attacks? In our opinion, this is what our healthcare system is well equipped for. But he's cutting something else, which is, how do you deal with a pandemic? What lessons can you draw from this pandemic? This applies worldwide, not only throughout Europe but also in the Netherlands. He's right about that. So we need to look at what else is needed for long-term crisis care in the future. It's gotta be robust. It's gotta be firm so we can get through a crisis like this. So we need to learn lessons from this crisis. By the way, I don't think you should put 20,000 people somewhere waiting for a crisis to come. I don't think that's a good idea. I don't think anyone wants a job like that either. I do not know whether Mr Wilders is proposing this, but it is sometimes suggested. I'm not saying that he thinks that he looks a little irritated, but you sometimes read in proposals \"set it up\" et cetera, like it's a defense organization that's not in the middle of a war. I don't think that's how it works. What you can do is look for a more flexible staff deployment. How can you ensure new forms of cooperation? How can you ensure better information exchange? How can you provide new forms of care? How can you ensure that digital care also makes a maximum contribution? How can you ensure that your ic and bed capacity can quickly scale up, even for a long time, if necessary? I agree with Mr Wilders that these are all questions that we have to look at with each other. This also applies to the whole question of stocks of personal protective equipment. On all these points, he and I agree. That is really one of the lessons that we have to learn worldwide, but that is not what we are here for; we are here for the Netherlands and for the Netherlands we have to pull out of this pandemic."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-11-04-tweedekamer-7.u365", "speech text": "Mr. Chairman. The Minister of VWS predicts that I will quote Lucebert: everything of value is defenseless. Oh, that was the Minister of Medical Care. That doesn't matter, Mr. Young One, because \"everything of value is defenseless\" is a truth like a cow. Mr. Chairman. If you don't get an answer, you've obviously asked a very difficult question. But I'm hanging in there, and the Cabinet can think about the following questions for two weeks. In any case, it is important for the cabinet to follow the OMT recommendations, for example those on vulnerable people in slaughterhouses. [[Motion]] [[The Chamber,]] [[heard the debate,]] [[noting that, according to the OMT, migrant workers remain a risk group for outbreaks of COVID-19;]] [[noting that the GGDs and RIVM are dependent on notifications from the companies where migrant workers work for this risk group;]] [[noting that the OMT therefore recommends a reporting obligation for companies with COOVID-19 clusters among employees;]] [[calls on the Government to establish a reporting obligation for companies with COVID-19 clusters among employees,]] [[and goes to the order of the day.]] [[This motion has been tabled by Mr Ouwehand. It seems to me that their submission is sufficiently supported.]] [[She's getting No. kst-25295-701]]"}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-11-12-tweedekamer-22.u41", "speech text": "It would be a little weird if we started arguing with each other now and all of us were going to give each other examples. The United States has put us in Syria for a great surprise. We are allies, but the decision to withdraw troops has been taken without any consultation with allies. The same applies to the attacks in Iraq at the beginning of this year and to diplomatic initiatives in the Middle East and North Korea. I think the examples are for picking up. I am not saying that the Netherlands is uncritical. Of course, the Netherlands has criticised a number of points. That's very good, I think. I noticed that the Prime Minister congratulated the President-elect this week, but immediately after saying: I also worked very well with his predecessor. And this minister also gave an 8 to cooperation with the United States last week. I find that very high, after four years in which an American president has really done a lot of destructive work. The Minister doesn't have to agree with me, but I'm committed to saying it. If you get Trump in line with Obama and Biden and you say they're asking all three of us to do more defense, I don't think you're doing justice to this president's predecessor and successor."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-11-12-tweedekamer-22.u87", "speech text": "No problem. It's only two meters, and I can cover it. I ask the Minister about these concrete measures. I can understand why he'd like to go to the Secretary of Defense's premises and talk about the finances. That is fine, but I would also like to say that this is not the only way to strengthen security in Europe. Then I will just take a quick look at the recommendations of the AIV and the lack of concrete steps taken by the cabinet. I would like to mention what Mr Van Helvert says about the Security Council. Then the Minister says: I have questions about that. That may be so, but we need to get a move on! Then it doesn't give a pass to point to parties and their defense deployment. We will see this defence commitment later, but what we can do now is to focus on foreign policy. That's what this minister stands for. It doesn't say the Secretary of Defense, it says the Secretary of State. I would therefore like to hear an answer from him to the question of what more we are going to do. And I am simply talking about measures and not about supporting the existing measures. I am talking about what more we are going to do and what more we can do to control defence security as much as possible. That we can't do that now without the United States, at your service!"}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-11-12-tweedekamer-22.u162", "speech text": "Then there's the relationship with Turkey. Mr De Roon indicated that, as far as he is concerned, Turkey should be expelled from NATO. We have often talked about the very difficult relationship with Turkey within NATO and as a large neighbour of Europe. That is a relationship in which the Netherlands very often has strong differences of opinion with Turkey, and it also expresses them openly. At the same time, there is the realization that Turkey will remain the neighbouring country of Europe, that it is located in a very strategic place, and that, in addition to the differences of opinion we have, we also have intensive cooperation with them, for example in combating terrorism, controlling migratory flows and economic cooperation. I think it would be wiser to have a critical discussion with Turkey in NATO. Mr Van Helvert pointed out that the Netherlands was the only country to have had such a critical discussion, even recently in the NATO Council. Where necessary, we will continue to feed them. In order to do so in the NATO Council, you must be both members. That means we're very critical there. The NATO Council referred to by Mr Van Helvert was indeed about the raid in Nagorno-Karabakh and the Turkish role in it. We have clearly expressed our disapproval of this. Earlier, we did that about purchasing Russian air defenses. As far as relations with the European Union are concerned, Mr De Roon asked whether the customs union could be terminated. The Customs Union is an international treaty. In order to terminate a treaty, there must be a violation of that treaty. Otherwise, you're in violation of international law. So there's no ground for that. As far as the accession negotiations are concerned, the Netherlands has already argued in Europe that, although the actual situation is that these negotiations are no longer taking place, it would be logical to formally terminate them. I have already had to report to you that there is very little support for this in the European Council. Mr Voordewind asked for sanctions. Mrs Karabulut has just gone into this in detail. There are currently sanctions against Turkey. A very clear message was sent to Turkey at the last European summit in October following Turkey's invigorating behaviour in the eastern Mediterranean and elsewhere. One is the outstretched hand: if you are prepared to return to the eastern Mediterranean and take constructive action, then the European Union is willing to strengthen its ties. That is hugely in the Turkish interest. Turkey is not just a large neighbour of the European Union. The other way around, that's even stronger. The Turkish economy is very close to the European economy. The Turkish economy is having a very, very difficult time. It would be in the great interest of the ordinary Turkish man or woman that these relations should be cited. So that outstretched hand is a must. At the same time, it is also very clearly indicated what the stick is. I believe that Mr Van Helvert called it \"the pastor and the chaplain.\" Undoubtedly that is a Limburg expression for the root and the stick. I don't know who the stick is with the priest and the chaplain. Mrs Ploumen, of course, knows that."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-11-12-tweedekamer-22.u325", "speech text": "I said, \"Excuse me?', Mr President, because I heard a slight factual error in Mr Koopmans' question. He was talking about what D66 did for defense. I'd like to start with that. Because D66 of this coalition might be the defense party. Under Rutte I, the VVD cut $1 billion in defense. Under Rutte II, the VVD saved 0.25 billion dollars on defence. And who turned that around? Then I look at Mr Van der Staaij and Mr Voordewind, who, together with my party, have reversed that trend of austerity. 115 million. 1,400 jobs at the Department of Defense. In all subsequent years, my party was involved in the investments in defence. Let's take a look at the election programs. The VVD programme does not contain the 2% of Mr Blok, but the European NATO average. So don't come to me with investing in defense, because that's our story. Now to the story I'm putting on top of that: the need for European cooperation. I have just outlined to you very clearly what the AIV wants with that Security Council, how important it is that we can react quickly in a crisis. I don't hear from the VVD. The proposal is ludicrous, but I do not hear a serious, concrete response to the serious points that the AIV and I have put down here. I would really like to say once again that it is crucial that we should not press the snooze button and think that the US is going to take over from us. You can't do that anymore. So if we are serious about European security, then I challenge Mr Koopmans and the VVD to do so once. And think of something that you are in favour of at European level at security level."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-11-17-tweedekamer-51.u9", "speech text": "Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The question to be asked in any debate about living together in a society, in a country, is this: is it possible to live together when a large part of the population lives according to the ideas of a split swam? In other words, do you have to accept it when a vibrant and active ideology in your country is engaged in attacking and controlling the leading culture? For who would accept it if, for example, he adopted someone, but then lived under the suffocating yoke of that person at home? Would the Minister accept that? Unfortunately, for a lot of people, the answer is that they're okay with it. In any case, this applies to the vast majority of the Chamber, from CDA and VVD to SP. They're all okay with it, except if what's splitting society is called Islam. Then everybody shut up. In fact, even in a statement on the terrorist attacks, the EU deleted the word 'Islamic', because that was not correct enough. The question of how to deal with Islam in the Netherlands and also in the rest of Europe has been going on for more than twenty years. In the almost 50 years that Islam has been working in the Netherlands to get a firm foothold, there is less and less of a society. Integration has been slow, barely, taking place. Assimilation is much less. We don't have a real society anymore. The Netherlands has a parallel. And as a warmer for this budget debate, we also had a debate with this minister last week, including on social cohesion. I asked the Minister about his opinion on how our society stands. I asked him that question seven to ten times, but there was barely or no answer. The minister ducked for most of the questions. How does the Minister feel about the coherence under the influence of mass immigration from Islamic countries? How does the minister feel about the rising racism of Kick Out Zwarte Piet, Black Lives Matter, Bij1, DENK, GroenLinks and D66? How does he feel about the discrimination against Dutch people in the housing market and in the care sector? I mentioned the increase in stabbings, especially by immigrants. I mentioned the threats to teachers when they wanted to discuss a Mohammed cartoon in the classroom. I mentioned the carbecues that are on the order of the I called it sizzling after women and also young girls. \"Kechba, hey kechie, you're nice and tight\" against 12-year-old girls. I mentioned rappers who serve as role models with subsidies and rig-floggers who get a TV program. It is the lowest of the lowest promoted by this government as an important lifestyle. I mentioned the gang, caused in more and more municipalities by immigrants and asylum seekers, with Scheveningen as a sad example this summer. In all these examples, I always asked the question: how does the Minister feel about the Netherlands and social cohesion? But there was no answer. And I think I know why. This minister would rather not deal with it. He has no influence whatsoever on the emo-blate about gender and inclusiveness of the Van Engelshovens, Ollongrens and Kaags, who make a parallel with their postmodern plans of this country. These D66 women together form the Bermuda Triangle of this country. Anything reasonable, including reason itself, disappears into it. Everything that makes sense disappears into this triangle. Our culture eventually disappears into it. The Minister for Social Cohesion seems to be watching defenselessly. Maybe full of admiration. Let him explain that in a minute. Maybe he loves all that gender drifting and inclusion bullshit. There is hardly any mention of integration under this minister, let alone assimilation. Assimilation is taboo, for years. Freedom within the integration debate and also with regard to the integration actions of the people themselves, reigns. Because inclusion is the fashion word these days. All the Dutch have to do is settle in and give up their place. Our moorhead slowly becomes baklava. Also good, but when it comes to integration, it's a different story. Mr. Chairman. And then I barely talked about the influence of Islam on our country. For if you want to know where the problematic behavior of many and fortunately not all Muslim men comes from, you must know that there is a prescription for that behavior. That prescription can be found in three books: the Koran, in the Sira, the biography of Muhammad, and in the Traditions, in which stories about Muhammad are told. What's the point? The consequences of following this Muhammad. These are the social consequences. In the Qur'an, their sacred book, there are 91 orders for Muslims to behave as Muhammad did 1,400 years ago. The example that Muhammad, the character, shows to his followers, is best summarized as that of a violent, narcissistic mass murderer and pedophile who subjugates the world, hunts and kills Jews, and hunts Christians over the blade. Then we are not talking about the homosexuals, I must say the Ihbtis and the women among them, let alone people who leave or want to leave Islam. An example we saw years ago and we still see in Islamic State, in IS. All they showed is one hundred percent like Muhammad. Mr. Chairman. With 91 orders in the Koran to follow this behavior, we may also say that in the Netherlands we are lucky that a large part of the Muslims in the Netherlands do not carry out or wish to carry out those assignments, but simply live according to our law, simply participate in our free Western society and want to do so. They accept our leading culture, without brimstones, just like anyone who's come here should. They thus give themselves a place in our free Western society. And also those who are free Muslims suffer from organizations and individuals who want to Islamicize our country. Many of them are not waiting for that at all! Leave them alone. One of the organizations that are very successful in politically influencing society with Muhammad's ideas is the Muslim Brotherhood. For years, the journalist Carel Brendel has been working on mapping these organisations, the associated individuals and the social positions that are being conquered and the environment that is then influenced by Islamic ideas associated with the Muslim Brotherhood, the FIOE, the FION, FEMYSO et cetera, all of such organizations. We also know that De Blauwe Mosque in Amsterdam is a mosque that is strongly influenced by the Muslim Brotherhood. In the parliamentary interrogation committee, it was Ronald Sandee who confirmed that. The imam of this mosque is the man who made a petition to restrict our freedom of speech, a petition that was then signed by 120,000 Muslims in the Netherlands, at least, I expect they were almost all Muslims, otherwise I wouldn't understand. So that's over 10% of the population. That imam is in the PvdA again on a committee that compiles election lists. That's Mr. Elforkani. We also know that the PvdA mayor of Arnhem is an ardent supporter of the Muslim Brotherhood. That is the mayor who, together with the VVD, tabled a motion in 2016 to pursue Salafists, in order to keep the brotherhood out of the field of politics. That's pure tactics and the VVD fell for it. Questions, Chairman. What does the Minister of the Muslim Brotherhood know? What does he know about that? In the meantime, what positions does the brotherhood in the administrative and administrative Netherlands hold? Are there any key positions in that? What about the army and the police? Why didn't the minister ever investigate this? Unfortunately, my 2016 motion, which called for this, did not obtain a majority, except for a few votes. But the signals from home and abroad have become so serious over the years that this research should be carried out, and also a ban. In fact, the cradle of the brotherhood, that's Egypt, forbade the Muslim Brotherhood. Saudi Arabia, a number of Gulf States and even Russia call the Muslim Brotherhood a terrorist organisation. In France and Austria, organisations of the fraternity are being addressed and investigated. Why is the Blue Mosque still open here, so I ask the Minister, and why all the other mosques? Is that because De Blauwe Mosque received millions from then alderman Asscher in Amsterdam? Or is it because the current mayor of Arnhem was one of the PvdA prominents in Amsterdam at the creation of De Blauwe Moskee? Questions, President, many questions, and I would like clear answers from the Minister. Don't say anything like last week. This \"Minister for Social Cohesion\" needs to know who is active in the administrative and administrative Netherlands for the world's perhaps largest and most effective organisation involved in infiltrating and influencing the politics involved in rolling out and realising Muhammad's ideas and actions. And the Minister must inform us of anyone who holds positions on behalf of that organisation and how he is going to deal with them. Clarity, clarity, but above all action. The Muslim Brotherhood is not the only organization that deals with the actions I have just mentioned. There are also Muslims who have less patience than the brotherhood. They call themselves a salafist and they regularly commit bloody attacks. We know all about this in Europe over the last few decades. They cause the empty spaces at the dining room tables in our free west. It is not for nothing that the mayor of Arnhem seems to turn against them at times. Too much blood does not do the creeping work of his brotherhood of course. But we also have the influence of sultan Erdogan from Turkey, the man on whom 70% of the Lower Turks voted in the last Turkish elections. He also has influence and ties with the brotherhood. And here in the Chamber, we also know that there are ties between Erdogan and DENK. But there are also links with Milli G\u00f6r\u00fcs another Islamization organization that has a branch in the Netherlands. Erdogan has 150 mosques in our country via Diyanet. Erdogan calls Dutch fascists and more of that kind of unfaithful. Then we have Fethullah G\u00fclen, Suleymanci: all Islamization organisations through schools and through workers. We have state images that come to teach Ramadan Moroccans during the Islamic month. There is influence of Gulf states here through the financing of mosques. We are going to have the debate on the parliamentary interrogation committee that I have just mentioned, but there is no beginning to be seen to stop all these Islamic influences here in the Netherlands. Apart from the PVV, the Room is mainly sleeping. Fortuyn, who came up, wasn't a signal. Van Gogh, who was killed by a Muslim, wasn't a signal. All attacks in Europe were not a signal. A lot of fine words, but no deeds. The alarm clock has now gone off hundreds of times, but most of the politics sleep quietly. Then I come to the question of when is politics in the Netherlands going to do its Islamic homework, rather than the racist, white homework suggested by the Labour Party? And when will the Minister do that? I'm about to finish, Mr. Chairman. Islam is a political ideology with a touch of religion. The wearing of the headscarf is above all and above all a political statement; that is the next subject, also just before the conclusion. This is confirmed by the SCP study of June 2018. In it, the Social and Cultural Planning Bureau writes: \"a large part of the Muslims wear the headscarf because they see it as an Islamic rule.\" But it also writes: \"wearing a headscarf can also function as an identity marker; it is then a statement from Muslims to the outside world about their Muslimness.\" In the Qur'an it is stated that a scarf must be worn so that it is easy to recognize them, so that they are not harassed. Thus the Qur'an is implicitly a book that legitimizes the harassment of unveiled women. The pregnancy of all or part of facial clothing in public space has a direct impact on all women who cherish their acquired freedoms and their security. The freedom to wear a symbol openly ends where it poses a danger to others who do not carry it. Symbols representing the visible distinction \"may or may not be harassed\" therefore do not belong in the heart of democracy and in public buildings. Banning it is the right thing to do. I call upon the Minister to do so. Mr. Chairman. It is time for the government to take action against Islam, to dismantle Islamic infrastructure and to appoint Islam by the government in the event of Islamic attacks. Away from that murderous political correctness. Recognizing and proclaiming that Salafism, non-violent and violent jihad have the same purpose, must also be done. That goal is to Islamicize our country. For where there is influence of Islam, there will never be peace. Never peace. Anyone who understands what Islam stands for and who thinks our freedom is worth it can only defend the Netherlands against Islam. Inviting and facilitating a hostile ideology means the end of the freedom and security that Dutch people deserve. It means destroying our culture step by step. It means the end of our traditions. It means getting Islamic customs imposed and, finally, Sharia. This government facilitates that process. This government and a large part of the Chamber bow. But we have to de-islamize. We must defend our rule of law. We have to defend our safety. We must defend our freedom. We must defend women, Ibtiqs, Jews and Christians. We must defend Muslims. That's our assignment. 'Cause whoever bows, he's gonna burst. Thank you."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-11-19-tweedekamer-6.u94", "speech text": "I'll make up for it with the defense budget."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-11-25-tweedekamer-8.u191", "speech text": "Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just got a sad message. Diego Armando Maradona died: Fluffy, youth hero. He's 60 years old. Mr. Chairman. These are special times. What's still like this today could be different tomorrow. We have, now that the cabinet is coming to an end, a housing crisis, we have a migration crisis, so I heard, and we also have a corona crisis. If the latter makes one thing clear, it is that we depend on each other but also on the government for our safety and our well-being. We are also more than the sum total of the individuals. In addition to the health crisis and the economic crisis, we see that COOVID-19 is also a violent crisis. And not all Dutch people are self-reliant, no matter how much we would like to see it. We're seeing an increase in domestic violence. The stress and tension within families are increasing, and the Child Phone has had 50% more conversations over the past few months about domestic violence, from 1,000 a day to 1,500. The number of victims of child abuse and sexual violence has doubled. UNICEF Netherlands is also ringing the bell. The consequences of the measures taken are considerable for children, young people and other vulnerable people, not only here but also in the Caribbean part of the Netherlands. In the midst of all this uncertainty, citizens must now be able to count on well-functioning institutions of the rule of law. I'm asking if the Cabinet is aware of that. What is the Minister going to do to protect these most vulnerable groups as well as possible, especially in these difficult times? Does the Minister also see additional support and resources for funding or supporting bodies that help here? Mr. Chairman. I'm worried about access to justice. I've been doing that for a couple of years. Access to justice is a fundamental right for people in our rule of law. It is also the basis of our rule of law. We must not allow this to be broken down by right-wing symbolism. The predecessor of this minister, the VVD Secretary of State Fred Teeven, was honest. He said, \"Look, if you just don't give a lawyer that much time, it's not gonna be that much with his defense. Lady Justitia is blind, and that is a good thing, because if she saw how the Rutte government is dealing with the rule of law, she would be ashamed of herself. We are seeing a number of problematic developments. Sander Dekker's demolition bullet is still raging through the social legal system. The social attorneys are underpaid and there's a huge drain. The only person who doesn't see that is the minister himself. We also see that more and more fines and penalties are being handed out outside the courts, the so-called criminal order for cases up to six years in prison. We also see that the costs of litigation have been so increased that citizens will refrain from exercising their rights. The minister's on the wrong track. He thinks he can achieve cost benefits through efficiency. That's what the cabinet thought when it came to youth care, but we're now seeing how the real costs come back as a boomerang. But then this minister would have flown a long time ago. Mr. Chairman. I come to asylum and immigration. The elections are approaching, so political parties are also looking for scapegoats to blame for everything that goes wrong. With grand, unfulfilled plans, they try to distract attention from one's own failure. The facts are painful: 79.5 million citizens fleeing war, violence, hunger or political persecution, a doubling compared to ten years ago. The causes are often proxy wars, disasters and climate change. Overcrowded refugee camps and a poignant lack of hygiene and medical care can be seen at the edges of Europe. Significant of how we deal with refugees is what happened in camp Moria. The cabinet refused to include any of these single, vulnerable children from Moria. Even when the camp filled up to the ridge burned down, we got a cynical and inhumane game. A deal was made under the leadership of the heartless VVD. The result: The Netherlands doesn't take anyone any more. What are the CDA, the VVD, D66 and the Christian Union stingy with supporting and helping children. They let them die: children who eat moldy bread in those overcrowded camps, sometimes sleep outside in the freezing cold, and face daily violence. Mr. Chairman. The highlight for me was this: the VVD was so proud of that harsh deal that they wanted a compliment from Wilders, and we know his views on refugees and asylum seekers. We also see an increasing decline in the acceptance of refugees. Even migrants, people of migrant origin, who have been here for generations, are being called increasingly negative. I'm really worried about that. We also see that more and more politicians are flirting with radical ideas. The cabinet warned about that before. But we now also see in the First and Tweede Kamer nazitermen used as \"overcrowding\" by the PVV. They contribute to the normalization of radicalisation and inspire terrorists. They are terms from the Nazi era, as our Prime Minister indicated in the First Chamber, where they preached for the preservation of the pure race. Mr. Chairman. The AIVD and the NCTV warn against the rise of extreme right-wing groups. DENK is concerned about these developments. A few years ago, we saw a survey of the PVV along the fascist measuring bar. Please note: this is not something I say, this is just an investigation at a Dutch university. That research was rewarded with an A-plus. There are striking similarities between the ideas of the PVV and fascism. The feeling of an overwhelming crisis Read: the threatening domination by Islam The fear that the Dutch identity is weakened by the influence of Islam, the threat of the expulsion of Muslims and the leadership of Wilders that is above any contradiction: it is dangerous rhetoric that does not miss its effect."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-12-01-tweedekamer-42.u68", "speech text": "Mr. Chairman. Today is World Aids Day. So today we are discussing all those people affected by HIV and AIDS. It is good to invite these rulers to consider how Defense deals with people who are HIV-positive or untectable in their term. Mr. Chairman. DOD needs to specialize. That is the main message in the vision given by these rulers to Defense at the end of their term of office. And with that they join GroenLinks after years, which has been pleading for this for a long time. Unlike GroenLinks, however, these directors argue that specialisation should be accompanied by a mega-investment, a growth path that increases to 16 billion extra annually in Defence. That's what the Minister and the Secretary of State want. Mr President, my group is sometimes accused of being over-ambitious and lack of realism, but as furious as the Minister and the Secretary of State, GroenLinks has never made it. We asked in the round of questions about the Defence Vision where the rulers would pay it out. Does it have to be paid for cuts in health care, education? Is the public debt supposed to rise now? Or should taxes be increased? The answer we got back was: yes, the next cabinet should figure it out. For directors who are in charge of an organisation that should be there when it becomes difficult, that is rather disappointing. Even when it comes to the question of how to specialized, it remains very quiet. It is, of course, unpleasant to make hard choices and to put army parts in front of the head, but I had hoped that the rulers, with their eyes on the exit, would have had the courage to make decisive choices. But don't worry, because because it is still difficult for this minister and secretary of state to make choices, GroenLinks is willing to deliver. We presented our own defence vision this morning. For the past year and a half, my predecessor Isabelle Diks and I have worked hard on this. We called it \"A Humanitarian Armed Forces.\" For GroenLinks, Defence has the greatest added value in supporting society, maintaining the international legal order, helping with calamities and protecting vulnerable people worldwide. We have analysed these needs in an analysis of the challenges and threats that Defence will have to be ready for in the coming decades. This results in our choice to specialize in the cyber domain and in the Navy. As far as we are concerned, there is no doubt that our cyber defense needs to be strengthened, so that we remain in control of cyber threats and can continue to protect our vital infrastructure. Cyber should therefore become a full, separate branch of Defense. What is the government's position on the creation of a cyber force command, where, to begin with, STPD and Defense Cyber Command could be placed under? Would this not contribute to a coherent approach to the cyber domain, and to a good political debate on the resources we want to make available for cyber defense? Apart from the wishes arising from our own defence vision, it seems to us right that politics should be able to make a choice of specialisation in the coming years on the basis of good, elaborate scenarios. Is the Minister prepared to initiate the identification of detailed options for specialisation? In doing so, it is necessary to consider at the level of equipment, units, budget and international cooperation what is necessary to enable various specialisations. As far as I am concerned, the exploration and wide-ranging social rethinks are far too general. I'd like a response. Then the staff, Mr. Chairman. The lack of progress in the new wage building in the Defense Department and in the settlement of compensation for the victims of chromium-6 were mentioned yesterday at the WHO, where unfortunately I could not be with the forest because of the treatment of my own initiative paper. Still, it's still wringing. In recent years we have been told that it is not possible to agree with the trade unions. When the Chamber asks, the answer of the Secretary of State is always: that is between employer and trade union. That's how it was yesterday. But if things go wrong over and over again, isn't there a structural problem? Where does the Secretary of State think it is? Are we simply dealing with trade unions that are not open to reasonable negotiations? Or is there something wrong with the tone on the Ministry's side? Would the Secretary of State be willing to look into that and see what he's into? Mr. Chairman. Which brings me to the real estate statement. Working in squeaky, squatting and trekking buildings does not contribute to the appeal of our defence force. It is clear that getting the real estate portfolio in order costs a huge amount of money. The Chamber has therefore embraced my motion to see what role cash slides can play. After all, revitalizing real estate is almost always a no-regret measure. I understand that in the meantime, with an inter-departmental delegation working group, it is difficult to identify policy options. How far has this working group gone? Can you say something about that? When can the Chamber expect the policy options? I could just imagine that it would be useful if those options were there for formation. Mr. Chairman. I am often quite critical of this Minister and Secretary of State, again today, but it is also important to give compliments where that is right, especially in the last budgetary treatment of these directors. My group greatly appreciates what this Minister and Secretary of State have done for the position of Ihbti persons within the armed forces. Examples such as the explicit inclusion of lhbti soldiers in the recruitment strategy and the roll-out of the rainbow runner on Coming Out Day are decisive for the tone at the top, which eventually floats into the broad organisation. There is also a world to be won. Women's participation in the Defense Department is improving, but it can and must be improved. The fact that there are still military components, like the Marine Corps, which no women are part of is a missed opportunity. Women make the armed forces stronger. Here too, the tone at the top is important. GroenLinks would like to encourage the cabinet to do more. For example, the Defense Department is about to acquire two new frigates. After that, more ships will arrive. It would be a missed opportunity if Defense did not have frigates named after brave women who have meant a lot to the Netherlands. Previously, former Defense Chairman Andr\u00e9 Bosman, we all missed him for naming a frigate after resistance heroine and first female military Francien de Leeuw. That didn't work because the naming was too far in the process. I hope we are on time now and that the Secretary of State will consider naming the M-fregates and possibly other ships in the future after Francien de Leeuw and Jos Gemmeke, another resistance hero who has meant an incredible lot to the Netherlands. I am considering tabling a motion at this point along with VVD and D66. This morning Mr Van Helvert mentioned this as a super good and beautiful idea, so I think he also wants to submit. Finally, the defence of the Caribbean. The Minister now knows that GroenLinks always pays particular attention to this. Previously, the Chamber adopted a motion from my predecessor Diks to strengthen international cooperation with other countries in the defence of the Caribbean. At the end of last year, you reported that a bilateral agreement is under way with France. What's the status of that now? When can we expect progress? And do you see any opportunities to strengthen cooperation with other partners, such as the US and the UK? All the way to the end, Mr. Chairman, and then I'm gonna finish. I'm gonna make a call to inform the Chamber more about ongoing missions. We now only get the annual report, which can only contain public information. It seems good to GroenLinks if there is a periodic, where necessary confidential, briefing for the Permanent Commission on the important developments and results of military missions. This could promote mutual understanding. Is the Minister prepared to think about that? Mr President, another afterburner. Yesterday 150 scientists in NRC called for a preventive ban on killer robots. Would you like to reflect on that? Thank you."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-12-01-tweedekamer-42.u138", "speech text": "Yeah, that's gonna have to come from other things, because in the end you can say... we're investing more in health care every year now. You'd almost say we invest more in health care every year; if you did that structuralally in defense once, you'd be a long way away. So you'll still be able to put so much into education, so much into health care and so much into home security, but if our national security isn't settled, all the first three things are of no use to us. Our country's insurance company, we call that defence company, so we're gonna have to be worth something. At the moment we pay \u20ac1.75 per person per day for that security. For that money, for the \u20ac1.75 per person per day, we also send our women and men to the most dangerous areas for peace and security."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-12-01-tweedekamer-42.u214", "speech text": "Thank you, Mr President. It's the second time we've talked about defense in the Chamber this week, and it's only Tuesday. Yesterday we had the legislative consultation and today and Thursday we had the budget debate. As far as I am concerned, this legislative consultation was primarily directed at the people of the defence sector, because they deserve it, and that is what is urgently needed. As far as I am concerned, the motto \"the people on 1\" with which you were thrown to death at the beginning of this cabinet period and what you hardly hear anymore is still in force. The people are the capital of the Defense Department. The men and women of our armed forces stand in the Netherlands and elsewhere in the world, sometimes at risk for their own lives, for our security, for our freedom and for those of our children. They deserve more appreciation, starting with their own employer. Yesterday I made a number of concrete proposals for this too. I made these proposals for the people who are now working for the Defense Department in terms of the better wage building, which really needs to be put in place, and for those who have worked in the Defense Department, from the chromium-6 victims who are still waiting for justice to the retired soldiers who sometimes miss thousands of euros up to their AOW. Today I make two proposals in the area of staff. The first proposal is to develop a master plan staff. I've been over that before. Which people should we have when, where and in what numbers? How do we get them in and how do we keep them in? How and at what rate do we grow to the desired situation and what financial resources do we need and are available? I think there is a real need for one plan in which the Defence Department sets out its views on personnel and how it intends to implement it. This does more justice to the great strategic importance of the issue that we have actually been discussing throughout this cabinet period. It offers the opportunity to focus, to shape multi-annual policies and to talk more meaningfully about their progress here in the Chamber. What it does, above all, is offer perspective to the people and to their organization. I'd like a response from the Secretary of State. The second proposal, Mr President. At the request of the Labour Party, the cabinet is allocating EUR 300 million for a so-called job guarantee for those who lose their jobs because of the corona crisis; a job guarantee so that they do not become unemployed with all the misery they cause, but are helped to a sector where there is work. Defense is such a sector. We heard yesterday that Defense is already being approached by companies and sectors. I'd like Defense to be at the front of that bag of money, of course, but especially when welcoming new people with open arms. Does the DOD have a concrete plan for that? That's my question. If not, how soon can that be? 'Cause I don't think we should let this opportunity pass. Mr. Chairman. Then the vision of Defense: long expected and not come. That is the tone of many comments, so left and right. From the beginning of this cabinet period, the review of the vision had been announced, but I do not see exactly what this review is made up of; and not just me. With all due respect to all the people of Defense who have worked hard on that, I share their threat and problem analyses. I didn't count it, but I have the feeling that the phrase \"the next cabinet\" is the phrase that is most common in this document. In that respect, it is a bit the \"people on 1\" from the Defence Note a few years ago. Mr. Chairman. Some have called it a grabbelton and others a wish list. It reminds me of the first time I asked my son to make a wish list. What I found in his shoe that night was actually the entire Intertoysfolder. He is now 8 and has said that this is the last year that he still believes in Saint Nicholas. What is really new about this vision, I ask the Minister? To what extent is it also aligned with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs? For for the Labour Party this cooperation is very important. What choices are really being made and what real choices have been made in the past period? Or was it a bit of a shop-shop-shop-shop-shop-shop-shop-shop-shop-shop-shop-shop-shop-shop-shop-shop-shop-shop-shop-shop-shop-shop-shop-shop-shop-shop-shop-shop-shop-shop-shop-shop-shop-shows what went wrong and why? Mr President, I am going to conclude. I have two further points to make. At the beginning of November, the Veteran Ombudsman again released the monitor complaint treatment Defense. Once again, he wipes out that my words are'my way of dealing with complaints to the Defense Department'. After all the previous excuses and promises, after previous letters from the Ombudsman, in fact at every level, the same Ombudsman says. His conclusion is that the highest leadership of the Defense Department should now really opt unconditionally for a professional complaint treatment that takes people and their complaints seriously, trying to solve the problem and not to win a battle. And what does the Minister do? She writes a short note to the Ombudsman saying that she is sending the youngest servant by. You can't do that! This repeated signal of what is still the authority in the Netherlands in this area must be taken more seriously by the Minister with regard to the PvdA. How is she gonna do that? Finally, Mr President, the way in which the regime for widows and children of men who were then executed by the Dutch army in the fight for Indonesia's independence is being implemented. Now that it has taken so many years for a regulation to come into being and now that it itself provides for a sum of \u20ac5,000 that the loss of your husband or father cannot, of course, make up for a long time, it seems that we can come up with nothing but to deny, in the end, almost all right holders of that compensation, that right, because they are late or because their request has not been made within a reasonable period of time. That goes against my sense of justice in calling on the Minister to amend this arrangement together with her foreign colleague. We should be ashamed of ourselves as after all this time, so the situation is now, but three children whose father was sometimes slaughtered before their eyes are eligible for that benefit. Do something about that, I'll tell the Minister."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-12-01-tweedekamer-42.u216", "speech text": "Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It has not yet been referred to by others, but we are still considering this year that it is 75 years since we were liberated. We have, of course, paid attention to this here and there, the rulers certainly, but I think again because it is not self-evident. We also see peace and security under pressure in many places in the world. I just read that in Trier, in West Germany, there was an attack by a driver of a car hit by pedestrians. We do not know exactly whether that was a terrorist attack or not, but at least it is horrible. And we know about other terrorist attacks in Europe. We have, of course, seen a horrible war in Nagorno-Karabakh and surrounding provinces, of a NATO ally who was actively involved. We have also discussed with each other in detail earlier in the Foreign Affairs budget how this can happen within a military alliance, where we stand for values such as freedom and respect for each other. On this point, I would like to ask the Minister if she would insist that Azeris at least want to release the prisoners of war to Armenia, because I understand that they are still being held, which is not in accordance with the agreement that has been concluded. Can the Minister respond to that? Mr. Chairman. Those threats are there. At the same time, we see that, fortunately, in the last four years, the Defense Department has been getting more money. These rulers have also made good use of it, at least to invest in equipment. A Defence Equipment Budget Fund has been launched. Mrs Belhaj and I have taken the initiative, and the rulers have submitted a law to that effect. In any case, this will give us some peace for the coming years in order to invest structurally decently in equipment. At the same time, we see that the readiness has not yet been restored. Defence is still unable to carry out the first main constitutional task, namely the defence of our own territory. Crucial to that, and I say it again: crucial is: investing in staff. This evening, in particular, I will focus on the lack of specialised staff. The situation with regard to our military apparatus is becoming increasingly complicated, the weapons are becoming more complicated. That also requires a lot more of our staff. And we see that at the moment we are looking at even around 9,000 vacancies. Of course, covid isn't helping either, I understand that. This is also cited by the Secretary of State. But we look at a very big hole, when the need is so great in the world. The shortage of personnel may remain the biggest problem in the defense. Because what good is a lot of equipment if we don't have a good staff? Without people, that very beautiful equipment is no use to you. There's still more people out than that coming in. I believe that is what Mrs Karabulut said. DOD has enough expertise in the house, but do we have enough expertise to prepare even the submarines we want to buy? In companies it is sometimes desired, and sometimes it is done, to buy people away. Is the DOD planning to buy out good personnel from the business community? There are shipyards that have to reject personnel. Is that what you're looking at? And it has already been mentioned, I believe by Mr Van Helvert, that we would be presented with a new wage building on 1 July. How's that going? It's been called arbitration. We really need it to get to that new pay house. If we hear from Major Van Leeuwen that sergeants are even on the poverty line, then we really need to look at the new wage building. For we must have a strong defence apparatus, but that must do justice to a responsible wage building. I'm asking the Secretary of State, when is this promised payroll gonna come? Shouldn't there be more resources to get sufficient qualified staff? I'd like to hear a response from the Secretary of State on that point. Mr. Chairman. Then the equipment, the submarines. It is a pity that the cabinet has decided, and I understand the procedural reasons for this, that we are no longer able to decide on the new submarines during this cabinet period. That leaves the cabinet to another cabinet. I would like to stress once again that Dutch knowledge and skills and the Dutch industry should be involved as much as possible in a decision. I really hope there will be a decision soon. It would be very nice for the province of Zeeland if we could have that built in Vlissingen. But the strategic importance of maintaining that knowledge and skills in the Netherlands is perhaps even more important. That is why I agree with what Mr Stoffer is going to say. He may not know that himself, but he will undoubtedly also say a number of things about the strategic importance of purchasing the submarines. Mr. Chairman. Then I'm gonna take a look at the clock, the Defense Vision. I am very pleased that the rulers have presented the Defence Vision 2035. Compliments for looking forward to so many years in the future. We are discussing what we need precisely if we want to have a responsible defence apparatus, including in the new relationship with America that we now have with us. I note, however, that NATO notes that there is still a lack in the Netherlands in terms of impact and operational support. In concrete terms, NATO is calling for a fully mechanized brigade. How's that going? Finally, Mr President, the Herwijnen radar station. As a group, we attach great importance to listening carefully to the wishes and to looking closely at the health of the people in Herwijnen. We tabled a motion in the previous debate, Mr Van Helvert, which led us to look again at the alternatives, not only in terms of health but also in terms of the height of the radar. I await the Secretary of State's response to that point. Thank you, Mr President."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-12-01-tweedekamer-42.u223", "speech text": "It would be a disaster for the Netherlands if we achieved 2% next year. But then we have to look further, because then I come to the story that Mr Van Helvert also held: that security is a basic condition. And of course it doesn't help you to just name 2% without hanging underneath it. But now look at that Defense vision 2035. That's a good vision, I must say. You can also see amounts in it. Then you can see that with that 2%, if you really want to do it right, we're still short. There are also absolute amounts in it. But that 20 billion, where it's about to go to that 2%, is where we need to go. Maybe it'll get a little over 2% one time and another time underneath. On average, you're on it. But we're talking about a good defense. I think 2% is a nice size. We're a long way from here. Let me tell you: I hope that our economy is not going so badly that we will have to say that we are already there with the amount we are putting into Defence. I do not believe that either, because our economy is so resilient that it will really start to live up again. I have every confidence in that."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-12-01-tweedekamer-42.u246", "speech text": "I was just checking to see if there was another interruption, Mr. Chairman. No. Then the staff, the final point but certainly not the most insignificant point. I think it is very important that we have good equipment and good staff and that we also take good care of that staff. That is why I would like to emphasise the importance of a sound staffing policy. People who are ready for the Netherlands deserve good working conditions. My question is what is the point on the horizon when it comes to creating an open and flexible staff model with a market-based remuneration system. The SGP Group is pleased that the 8.5% increase in reserve reserves compared to mid-2019 contributes to the deployment of the armed forces, but at the same time we are concerned about the lack of planned inflow and filling rates. My question is whether there is a plan to solve this. Finally, I would like to stress the need for good psychological care for active military and veterans. Military people sometimes face difficult moral dilemmas. This is almost impossible to imagine in civil society. This can cause later guilt about something they did or left behind. That's a big impact. My question is whether there are sufficient resources available for training or therapies to prevent and/or process moral injury before and after the broadcast. Do you need extra bets for this? (NL) Mr President, all in all. This is the last defense budget of this cabinet period. I would like to thank the Minister and the Secretary of State and all the military personnel and civilian personnel of Defence for their great commitment during this period. I would say: let us also fight with each other in the near future for a military force that also protects the next generations in our country and beyond. Thank you."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-12-03-tweedekamer-4.u5", "speech text": "That's right! Thank you. And I can see Mr Van den Nieuwenhuijzen, and you too, Mrs Karabulut! For three years, together with the Secretary of State, I was given the responsibility to rebuild the Defense Department. Some of you have already spoken about this. We found an organization that, to put it this way, had been seriously hollowed out. Everywhere we went, we met people with so much passion to do their job. It touches me every time, the pride our men and women feel when they can do something for someone else. That is what military personnel are trained for: to become someone others can count on. I think that's really beautiful. I also liked the fact that some of the members of the Chamber spoke about this. I also recognize the endeavor of Hannie van Leeuwen. She was my great inspiration. I've talked about that before. \"Radio Hunter Hannie,\" indeed. She was a former resistance fighter. Looking back on her life, she said, \"I've tried to live for someone else.\" I really like that. As Secretary of Defense, you meet people who live by that motto all the time. I call the active military, but also veterans. But I do not want to leave the citizens who work in the Defense Department unnamed. I am now thinking of older veterans, of people like Rudi Hemmes, who stood in the throne speech last year, who fought as a young man on D-Day. Now Rudi is a wise gentleman from far in the 90s who enjoys the freedom for which he has fought and who, to this day, feels involved in Defense. It is a great pity for people like Rudi, I think, that we have not been able to celebrate our 75 years of freedom with each other, as Mr Voordewind said, I see that he has not yet arrived. That's how I spoke in May this year at the memorial in Margraten. I thought it was a very surreal moment. Normally there are thousands of people behind them digging American graves to honor the American men and women who have ultimately paid the highest price for our freedom. Now I was standing there with just a handful of people. And as you know, Veterans Day took place in a small circle. But still, that \"Soldier on\" of Di-rect touched me deep into the heart. I also sent a tweet about it yesterday in the context of the 2000 Summit, because it indicated so well what is happening to us. I miss, as I wanted to say as an introduction, the moments when we can all reflect on the past and show respect for our veterans. Then I think not only of those older veterans I mentioned, but also of younger veterans, such as Liesbeth, who was on TV in the documentaries of Coen Verbraak about Srebrenica, 25 years after the fall. Her courage then and the pain she feels to this day cut into my soul and I think in the soul of many of you. Stories like this have to motivate us to do better in politics, to do better together. Our soldiers need support and respect, from society, from politics, from us. They need more colleagues and good stuff, and a vision that goes beyond one cabinet. That's what I want to talk to your room about today. I'll give you a quick look back from the Defense Note first. That's my first block. Then I'll look forward to the future, with the Defence vision. That's my second block. Then I'll go into all your room's questions about the Defense vision, space, cyber and the LIMC. I shall mention them separately. The Secretary of State will then go into more detail on the results of personnel, safety, equipment and management and the plans relating to these issues. I shall start with my first subject, namely the steps we have already taken and the question of where we are now. A number of Members of your Chamber asked for this. After decades of austerity, the past few years have been a turning point. And it's really doing a lot better with the DOD. We've dealt with the most pressing problems. All the ambitions set out in the coalition agreement have been set in motion and some have been implemented. And we have more insight into the problems we have as a defense; that is also very important, I think. We've also collected things from what we encountered. What I like is that society's appreciation of Defence's competences has increased in recent times, from a 6.1 in early 2017 to a 7.0 in the first half of this year, 2020. That's actually a whole point more. In addition, you can also see that within our organisation the appreciation and confidence have increased. I'd like to report that here. In the work experience study we see that there is a significantly higher satisfaction among our people. That is good news, because the Secretary of State and I have mainly been working to restore the trust of our people in the organisation. There is, of course, a new collective agreement, and the Secretary of State will go into that further, but we have also set up, for example, an inspection security, as we had agreed. Safety is also extremely important for our people. We have also worked, as Mr Van den Nieuwenhuijzen said, for diversity and inclusiveness. We celebrated 75 years of women at the Department of Defense last year. A beautiful book has also been published on this subject. The share of women in Defense is increasing, from 13.9% in early 2017 to 7.939 in 2020; that is 9.822. So there are 1,900 more women. The number of female soldiers has increased from 9.5% to 10.7%, from 3.877 to 5.165. That's almost 1,300 more women. At the summit, too, I am convinced that you always have to work on the middle framework before you get to the top. We now, as you know, employ a new Deputy Commander Air Force, a female two-star general of 44 years. Beautiful. We have also indeed, Mr Van den Nieuwenhuijzen, been very active in inclusiveness. We're at the Gay Pride, as you know. We have released a brochure Insight into transgender, to increase understanding and knowledge around transgenders. We're paying attention to Coming Out Day. We've actually done that from the beginning. You quoted the bishop. We started with cute little mats. We thought that was too small. We have ensured that a very large bishop will eventually be rolled out, although this year without the people there. As you know, the Secretary of State and I rolled out the bishop after all. The operational combat support has been strengthened so that the military can train and exercise better, be more employable in the short term and maintain missions longer. Because that is particularly important. We have invested in the Defence Memorandum from the Investment Programme in the modernisation of the armed forces with a hundred projects. The questions asked about the projects will certainly be addressed by the Secretary of State. We have made important decisions on the replacement of submarine capacity, the M-frigates, the Fennek and combat equipment. The F-35 is now pouring in and we've been able to buy additional devices. I will say a few words about this in the NATO plan. The Secretary of State will go into this further, but I think that this has really increased our capacity for action and our employability. And this year, for the first time, we have a separate budget for these material projects with our defence equipment budget fund. A single member of your Chamber spoke about this. In this connection, Mr Voordewind referred to his motion and also to Mrs Belhaj's, and rightly so. As far as I am concerned, we are really ensuring that the defence budget is more future-proof. That is my firm conviction. This was also in the coalition agreement and we have worked on it, also according to the amendment. You don't usually buy large equipment off the shelf somewhere. It always means a multi-annual investment and that means you need longer-term insight. A total of 1.7 billion is added structurally per year and an additional 1.7 billion is invested on an occasional basis up to 2024. That extra money, as you know, comes from the national plan for NATO that we have created. There are provisions for intelligence, digital security and the military police. Of course, there has also been added this year for the fight against covid."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-12-03-tweedekamer-4.u8", "speech text": "This is the question that comes with the Defense Vision block. That's the next block. It is not the case, by the way, that we say in our Defence vision that we want to invest this 17 billion entirely in weapons, let me add. There's no way that's in our defense vision. But I think that we are certainly safer working with each other on a credible deterrent, if we have good material and if we can protect our own territory. I'm just disagreeing with you on that point. Our people need the best stuff. We have also indicated the choices for this. I'll come back to that later. We just can't right now. We're not well enough tailored to our own task. So that's gotta be better."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-12-03-tweedekamer-4.u12", "speech text": "Locking up. What the minister puts his head in the sand and a lot of parties here is that because of this permanent warfare that has nothing to do with defense but which is purely about geopolitical power and influence, there has just been more terrorism, more terrorist attacks, more refugees there and here. This is just a dead end. And then, under the guise of a pandemic in which hunger and inequality grow, this minister wants to put even more billions of Dutch people into that forever confused. We do not want that, and the Americans do not want it. It's short-sighted."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-12-03-tweedekamer-4.u16", "speech text": "I want to move on to the point that looking at what we have written in the Defence Note, we can be proud of what we have done and what we have put down. This year was of course a very different year than we had thought, the year in which we would celebrate the peak of 75 years of liberation. And then there are other sad aspects, such as the death of Christine and Erwin this summer due to a helicopter accident near Aruba. The President of your Chamber also attended Christine and Erwin's return. I liked the presence of the representatives of the people. Something like this intervenes deeply in the organization. We have also, of course, discussed with your Chamber the tragedy in Hawija. We have to be open and honest about this. We've been working on transparency for the past year. A new procedure has been agreed with the House of Representatives on how we provide information and when there may be civilian casualties to regret as a result of our actions. I think that is an important step. In the area of transparency the necessary has happened, but, honestly, there is still more to be done. What is clear is that we need to be a more transparent organisation. That is why the design principle has been included in the Defence Vision, so that we can continue to steer it ambitiously. Then my second point, the Defence Vision. We see that much remains to be done. If you ask me if the organization is ready for the future, the answer is simply no. We have taken a first step in this period. We have made significant concrete improvements from the Defence Note, but there are still many problems to be solved. We have just talked about the global deterioration and complexity of the security situation. That's what we need the DOD to do. With the current organization and state of the organisation, we are simply not adequately equipped for future threats. To take the next steps, we have presented the Defence Vision 2035. We have made this vision, I say, together with the whole organisation, including all operational commanders. And other ministries too, Mrs Belhaj's question is very much involved. It's the vision of the entire cabinet. It's a new profile for our defense organization. That's what we're working on right now. Regardless of the budget, we have to work that way. We're gonna use the Defense Vision to choose that profile. We are making fundamentally tough and new choices, for example, to work in an extensive way, to specialise, to strengthen Europe. These are the choices of the cabinet that have also been carried out, I say to Mr Van den Bosch, Mr Van den Nieuwenhuijzen, Mrs Belhaj and Mr Kerstens, who asked for them. I therefore feel supported by Mrs Belhaj's words, which emphasise the importance of specialisation and European cooperation as a step in that direction. I also know, of course, the own-initiative paper she has written on this subject. I'd like to tell you that we can't choose between threats; they're all there. That's how we built it. Together with our partners, we must be able to do this, and we must all contribute to this. Mr. Chairman. The Defence vision 2035 is about the truth and the what, not about the what. That's why it's a vision. This vision will need to be further developed in a next Defence Note, for example in strategic, operational concepts and in policy. These are the next steps, I say in response to Mr Stoffer, who asked about the implementation. The next Cabinets will therefore have to consider these next steps. The Defence vision, to our firm conviction, offers a real basis for doing so."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-12-03-tweedekamer-4.u19", "speech text": "If that is the background to Mrs Belhaj's question, then the Dutch armed forces are not at all tailored to all the threats there. As you know, we must always do so in cooperation with NATO or in a European context. We need to work together. Our answer is that we are simply not tailored to our constitutional task alone. I will also come to your specific question about the strategic compass, because we are also looking in Europe at threats that we are now seeing at European level. That's the first thing we do, that threat analysis in Europe. As far as I am concerned, from this threat, we are looking for the Netherlands from the current base where we can best specialise and what is best for the Dutch task. Because it's obvious that we can't do everything. We can't do that now, and we can't do that in 2035. So we need to be tailored to those threats together. And we choose the profile of information-driven, high-tech, reliable and from small to large, independent performance. I would also like to say that we have also calculated for the first time in the Defence Vision 2035. We have, of course, seen the criticism of this in terms of what it costs if we did everything right and set it up. And even then, it's just a question of whether we're tailored to everything. Even then, we have to choose. That is ready for whoever will be a next cabinet, but it is a real gain that we have never been so transparent about what comes to us before, what the problems are, where the needs lie and that costs money. What that costs, we have indicated in cubes in your direction. That is a step that the Chamber has asked us to take in recent years: show it and work it out in long lines. Regardless of the budget, the whole organization believes that we need to work in the new way. Mr. Chairman. As I said just now in response to a point by Mrs Karabulut, the value of security should not be underestimated as far as I am concerned. Security is a prerequisite for freedom, prosperity and democracy. Safety must therefore also be worth more to us. I think it is very important to have the political and social debate on this issue. At the presentation of the Defence Vision, I also said something about this. In this sense, I would like to express my appreciation for Mr Van den Nieuwenhuijzen. I did read your defense vision. We know from our own experience how much work it is to write such a piece and we still have an entire organization. What I saw was that we signal the same developments in the world around us. We both note that, in the present state, we are not up to these threats. That was the little debate we just had. But we provide different solutions to the threat and problem analysis. What we at least share is that attention to the cyber domain is very important. We both agree on the importance of a sound basis. That is what I want to say here. I've looked at it again in your view. That is extremely important, we both think. Mr. Chairman. Defense needs a long-term political commitment. This is particularly true in the direction of the organisation, but also, of course, in the budget, a point which Mr Stoffer has repeatedly raised. Defence needs this not only to carry out the changes, but also to cooperate with our allies within NATO and our partners in Europe. NATO was clear in the report on the Netherlands, which I also sent to your Chamber: it is not good enough. I saw it go public yesterday. The Netherlands has taken good steps, but more is needed. It is good that this is transparent. Our defense vision is on the verge of that. Our current contribution to our common security in money, commitment and capacity is simply not enough. We are the fifth economy in the European Union and yet we are constantly dangling at the bottom of the list of defence expenditures within NATO. With those who said that on Tuesday, I also think that a new American president will not let go of the 2% standard, and rightly so. We are a prosperous country and we have to pay our contribution for a membership that has protected us for 70 years. For me, it is very important that we have a debate in society about what security is worth to us. Mr President, I will be in a moment to answer the questions I am going to answer. This was my second block."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-12-03-tweedekamer-4.u22", "speech text": "The Minister states that the Defence Vision is clear about the threats that are coming to us, but that is, of course, not true at all. The greatest threat, which is clear to all, is the threat of Islam and of Islamic terrorist attacks. We've seen that everywhere. There's hardly any talk about that in that defense vision. So my question is why the greatest danger facing us as a Dutch, western society is simply being completely muffled away. Then the Defense Vision is already out of the question."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-12-03-tweedekamer-4.u42", "speech text": "Fortunately, of course, we still have the European Union, where we are trying to reach an arms embargo. Maybe the Minister can say something about that. As far as NATO is concerned, the Minister says: we are going to see what we could possibly do with the evaluation committee. I would like to give the Minister the question of whether there is a discussion about this. You can't throw them out of NATO, but there might be a discussion about a possible suspension of Article 5. Article 5 could be suspended when a member behaves so aggressively that it could be attacked again, for example by Russia. Are we still obliged to provide defense?"}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-12-03-tweedekamer-4.u190", "speech text": "We certainly carry out the tasks, but it is not our responsibility. The authority really lies with JenV. This is how we divided it into this country. I'm not denying the threat, by the way. I really want to take that idea away. That's what I said at the beginning of my story about the Defence Vision. It may not have been included in the Defence Vision long enough for Mr Fritsma, but it is indeed a real threat. It's one of the threats that we're prepared to face and that's in our defense vision. That is why we are acting in Iraq and Afghanistan. That's also to stop people, as you know. It's better to avoid it. Mr President, the rest is for the Secretary of State."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-12-03-tweedekamer-4.u202", "speech text": "Yes, I will come back to that later. I think Mr Kerstens is right to ask what opportunities Defence sees in these difficult corona times. What he says is important. We do indeed have a labour market which is shrinking in the short term in terms of the number of young people, which Defence must be talking about, given the physical efforts of the military. I know that Mrs Belhaj would also like to register, but that because of her age she is no longer able to do so, because there are demands. That is precisely why we want to reform. I think it is important, also in view of the results achieved during this cabinet period, that we have achieved two very major reforms. I mentioned it last Monday in the legislative consultation: we managed to implement a new military service termination scheme. This means very clearly that you will retire five years before reaching the AOW pensionable age by means of the Umm (Executive Military Act). That is an important reform. Another reform that we have managed to achieve during this cabinet period is the transition from the final wage system to the middle wage system. All things that have been discussed for a very long time. The same applies to the new staff model and the remuneration system. You know: a pay system that is more than 100 years old indicates how complex it is to change that. That has to do with what I just said: if you have more than 30,000 functions and you want to change the remuneration system, that means you have to take a lot of steps to do it carefully. That's why we're doing it staged. I'll start with the HR model. Mr Kerstens, Mr Stoffer and Mrs Belhaj asked in the legislative consultation last Monday what that would look like. I have indicated that two things are important when it comes to the frameworks for a new HR model. That has to do with a new defense vision. It has to fit in with that, of course. You have just had an exchange of views with the Minister. It has to be high-tech and information driven, so that also means something for the way you set up your model. By definition, this means more room for customization and v differentiation, because cyber, for example, is not comparable with medical personnel. That actually applies to everything within the Defense Department. This includes a new system of remuneration. We do that on the basis of a number of tracks. One of these is new forms of appointment and contract. We have experimented with this in the labs in the past period. The second is the introduction of strategic talent management. That's very important. Now everyone follows the career path of the organization, so everyone has to go through the same mold. Now we turn it around: we start with the employee and we look at what we can do using strategic talent management. It looks at what needs to be done per employee. That is a fundamental change. That sounds very simple, but that's not how the organization works at the moment. That is why we have chosen not to start with policy pieces from The Hague reality, but to start with phase zero. I just mentioned them as well: the test gardens. Mr Van Helvert asked: is it true that 30 soldiers were appointed in one day and that they could also proceed immediately? Yeah, those are the labs at the Peel. Until a few years ago, it was totally impossible that you could be placed directly in a position in one day. What did we do there? We have looked at the inspection requirements and what kind of work people are actually going to do. - Is that a check-up? - Yeah. Can't you do something else with that? Can't you offer other contracts? We also do this in Volkel, in Oirschot and in Den Helder, when it comes to the submarine that has just started. We do that on different fronts. We look at what we get out of it and how we can then translate it into policy. At the heart of the matter is that we have centralized a great deal when it comes to our staff. If you want to go back to the individual, you have to decentralize a lot and put a lot of things back with commanders themselves, because they experience the employees in practice. That's what we're experimenting with in the labs. On that basis, we are looking at what kind of things we need to change in policy. We have now invested a lot of mandates lower in the organization. We have made sure that we have come to other courses together with rocks in the labs. Defence is also much more anchored in the region itself. We have agreed with companies in the region on a job guarantee, so that people who have worked at Defense can make a switch to another company in the region. So much has happened in that sense. That's phase zero. We deliberately chose to let that go through and take it with us. That also raises the question of Mr Kerstens and Mr Stoffer: what does the picture look like now? I want to draw up the programme plan early next year. How are we going to do that strategic talent management? How are we going to do these new forms of appointment and contract? That's included. Last Monday I indicated that there were a number of conditions for this. This should be supported by a new staff organisation, new IT and strategic staff planning. You want to know what is happening in the labour market and how. These five elements will make up that programme plan. I said last Monday that it would take three to five years for you to actually implement all of that, because you're actually asking for an organizational change. Anyone who has ever experienced a major organisational change knows that three to five years is quite short. But you also want to be able to adjust those career paths by Defense Unit. We do not want to say Defence-wide how things should be dealt with, but leave the army, the air force, the navy and the Royal Marechaussee the room to do so."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-12-03-tweedekamer-4.u264", "speech text": "As you know, it's not about individual cases here. The Chamber may, of course, do so, but I do not think it is appropriate for privacy reasons to deal with individual cases in this Chamber. However, as Mrs Karabulut knows and as I indicated last Monday, you have to rely on something for a generic regulation. We're looking at individual cases. To this end, the claims that an individual can submit apply. For generic schemes, you have to rely on something. We have based ourselves on RIVM research, i.e. on science, as well as on the frameworks that are widely applicable in the Netherlands, which have been established in this Chamber and which see causality. I'm talking about exposure to that dangerous substance. Mrs Karabulut knows that these are the frameworks we are sticking to now. Mrs Belhaj has tabled a motion and asked: what would it mean if you set up these frameworks differently, not only for Defence, but also for the entire government and all employers in the Netherlands? This isn't just about defense anymore. I am basing myself on the frameworks that exist. I said I was going to ask Mrs Karabulut's question to RIVM. I'm not talking about answering the RIVM. RIVM is going to try to answer it before Christmas. I don't know what's coming out of it. It depends on what comes out of it. I am sure that Mrs Karabulut and I will be speaking on an individual basis."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-12-03-tweedekamer-4.u292", "speech text": "No, the question of the Chamber, and also of the First Chamber, in September 2019 was: look at alternative locations. Are there similar locations when it comes to coverage? That was the question for the alternative research and I returned it to the Chamber. Are there any locations that provide similar radar coverage? Because that's essential. We have a radar in Wier and we need another one to protect Limburg, Brabant, Zeeland, Zuid-Holland, Noord-Holland and part of Flevoland and to do air defense. That was the assignment and that is how the alternative research was carried out. Of course, wherever you place a radar, no matter what you do around non-ionizing radiation, you have to comply with the guidelines. So that goes for me, too. These are international directives: the ICNIRP directives. In response to the request made by the Chamber, I looked not only at the radiation from the radar, but also at the composite radiation. Mr Voordewind asked: what is the radiation of the KNMI radar or of shipping, navigation? That's 0.10 in staring mode and also in rotating mode. That's what I gave the Chamber. It's 1.15 on the navigation radar in staring mode and rotating mode. The composite radiation will vary from location to location throughout the Netherlands, because these things, mobile phones, Wi-Fi and routers, give a lot of radiation. So it will vary from location to location. It is likely to be many times higher in urban areas than in rural areas."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-12-03-tweedekamer-4.u344", "speech text": "Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It should work in two minutes. Mr. Chairman. This is my last defense budget. I think I've had ten years as Defense spokesperson in this house. It is with great pleasure that I have worked with colleagues, and also with the various rulers, including these. But first of all, I would like to thank the military, who have also been working in the Netherlands for the past eight months with the hospitals and the test streets. There you see these men and women are hands-on. They can be deployed very quickly, and we have many thanks for that in recent months. But there is also, of course, thanks for men and women, although there are a lot less at this time, who have to do their job abroad, and stand up for peace and international law. I want to be the first to say that. Then I thank these rulers for the answers to my questions. I have co-signed a number of motions from colleagues. I would like to mention two of them explicitly: that of Mr Van Helvert, when it comes to alternative research into the radars that should be placed in Herwijnen, and Mr Stoffer's motion on the invitation to tender for the submarine. I have one more motion of my own. It's about readiness. This is an important priority for both directors. That is also reflected in the reply and also in the written reply. The Secretary of State has also dealt with this, but I would like to dwell on one aspect, by means of this motion. [[Motion]] [[The Chamber,]] [[heard the debate,]] [[Whereas the restoration of readiness must be of the highest priority for our defence;]] [[Whereas the quantitative and qualitative staff shortage constitutes one of the identified factors affecting the absence of a significant improvement in material readiness;]] [[calls on the Government to use the resources from the Defence Budget as a priority to do whatever is necessary to acquire the personnel required to significantly improve material readiness,]] [[and goes to the order of the day.]] [[This motion was tabled by Mr Voordewind, Mr Van Helvert and Mr Belhaj. It seems to me that their submission is sufficiently supported.]] [[She's getting No. kst-35570-X-52]]"}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-12-15-eerstekamer-4.u4", "speech text": "Mr. Beukker's talking about staff shortages in the Defense Department, but isn't it also a bit of a defense issue? Because you can also hear sounds from the field, especially from the lower ranks. They'd like to move on. They'd like to stay with the DOD. Everything is promised, but then those promises will not be kept. At some point, these people think, \"Well, fat nose, three beers, we're going.\" They also often get temporary contracts, while they want to stay longer, but that is not regulated either. So is it, in part, not to blame for the higher framework?"}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-12-15-eerstekamer-4.u11", "speech text": "In short, the armed forces are not doing well. In my speech, I will take this on three tracks. The bottom line of my speech is that this Defence budget does not solve the problems, but only shifts them to the next cabinet. We in the First Chamber must find something about this and, I hope, propose a possible start to a solution. In its Defence vision 2035, the Minister states that 13 to 17 billion more is needed to prepare the military for the future. That's correct. But today and in the coming years, this budget will not be able to fulfil the constitutional tasks assigned to it. The interpretation is lifted over the cabinet period. We, as the First Chamber, must assume our responsibilities and help the Minister to set a path to how and when we can meet constitutional obligations with the armed forces. I'd like a response from the Minister to this. This budget does not even begin to solve this major problem. Our security insurance's broken. Moreover, in a few years' time the budget will fall substantially, rather than the expected upward trend. We're going back to the time of the broken rifle. In many responses to the Minister's vision, former military and experts, as well as the Court of Auditors' accountability, stated: \"The Minister gives Parliament a rosy and incomplete picture of the delayed readiness.\" Here too, I would like to receive a response from the Minister. Even Clingendael, in the person of Ko Colijn, indicates that this minister only leaves paper for her successor. On 12 October the Minister received a very critical report from the Court of Auditors on the under-budgeting of major projects. The answer received from the Court of Auditors was that \"this is common practice in these procedures.\" To which the Court replied: 'but not yet correct'. In short, the Defence vision 2035 is a curious will with a lot of attention to technology, but there is not even a plan to implement it. This budget throws the problems over the fence to the successors. I'd like to get a response from the Minister. The second line of my speech is that of international cooperation and commitments, in particular the Prime Minister's promise made in Wales in 2014. In 2008, NATO called the Netherlands an anorexia patient. In 2010, it was reported that amputations had been carried out in scarce capacities. And now, in 2020, we are called pariahs. In other words, NATO is giving us a gross incompetence and we are parasitic on other countries, including European ones. For example, NATO calls for'much-needed investments in land forces', but neither the Defence Vision 2035, nor the Defence Budget is implementing this. With the seventh economy in NATO, we are dangling at the bottom, to be precise: as the eighteenth out of 29 years old when it comes to fulfilling this promise. Here, too, this Defence budget does not take any steps in the right direction, not even in the long term. Is the 2% promise now definitely going into the trash? Does the Minister accept that she cannot carry out her constitutional duties and abandon the promise made to the allies? So let us be clear about this to our allies and to our own people. I'd like a response from the Minister. Mr. Chairman. Finally, as promised, the third approach route. This is the beginning of a solution. One of the austerity measures still continuing with the Defense Department is the RVU fine due to the functional age discharge from the Military Civil Service Act. Under pressure from the cuts, this scheme has been designated by Social Affairs as a pre-pension scheme for several years. But it's not. It's an ongoing austerity measure. Then why don't you just come out and say it? For the record, this was created when the soldiers concerned had no choice at the time. They had to leave and comply with the law. Subsequently, the organisation still has to pay the annual fine under the tax scheme. This problem is still going on. Hence the request. Setting up an interdepartmental committee together with the Tax and Social Affairs Department a year after we have talked about this in this house, as the Secretary of State can do now, is really not enough for us. It is even administratively weak, unjust and undesirable. This cabinet can easily solve it itself, but it seems that there is no will to do so. The lessons of the broken rifle and corona still haven't landed. This problem, too, is being postponed by the cabinet, while stopping this fine would be beneficial for the defence. Is this another perpetuum mobile of delay? Because we know what comes of delay. On the one hand, the Ministry of Finance clears the defence budget, but on the other hand the fine is collected on the same day. Our allies and NATO, of course, see that as well. It's called in good Dutch just windowdressing. Mr. Chairman. Last year, I asked you to stop this. In fact, this could have been repaired in the spring note, even with retroactive effect. My motion has been held and now, unfortunately, there is nothing left in the defence budget. The House of Representatives recently discussed this issue in the budget debate, but once again there was no meat or fish, or even any sense of urgency in the cabinet. Let us be clear as a senate and speak out. At the time, the defense respected the law and sent the military with FLO and the regulation has now been amended. What remains and what remains for us as a Chamber is to repair this injustice with retroactive effect over the interim phase and then to do what our armed forces and our people in Wales have been promised. The restitution of this unjustly levied fine will help the Defense to solve the major personnel problems in particular. There are still many matters to be resolved, such as the new system of remuneration and the corresponding system of allowances and so on. From this house, we can help the Ministry of Defence in a relatively simple way, and directly. Finally, Mr President. This puts an end to the needless pumping around of money, to the shadowiness of how much money is actually being spent on Defense, and it helps the Minister in her working conditions consultation. This increases the Dutch contribution to his safety and that of his allies, because we are all responsible for that. After all, they are constitutional tasks. We look forward to the reactions. Thank you."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-12-15-eerstekamer-4.u32", "speech text": "Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'm also happy to be in your First Chamber once. Last year that was not necessary, but now there are a number of issues that affect me as well. So I am happy to come here with the Secretary of State at this bizarre and crazy time; I think we all think so. In particular, I would like to address points 1 and 2, although a number of parts also touch the Secretary of State's portfolio. It will therefore deal with this matter. First of all, I would like to respond to the general picture put forward by Mr Beuker. From the outset, when we recommended, I said that the investment this government is making in Defence was at that time EUR 5.5 billion is just a good start. That's the first thing I said. I would like to make this point very clear, because it seems that Mr Beuker no longer has that in mind. We, the Secretary of State and I, have worked hard. With this 5.5 billion in investment, we have written our Defence Note. We started talking from low to high in the organization. I say this deliberately towards a general b.d.: We deliberately started talking from low to high to hear what's at the bottom of our organization. It's no secret: we're pretty freaked out. That's what I said. That's what we based our Defence Note on. We have indicated how we are going to spend this 5.5 billion. We've worked on it successfully. This budget is the final phase of the 5.5 billion and the plans we have made for it. It is therefore a budget in which choices are made. It is our last budget; that is what we have said. This budget comes in the year of 75 years of liberation. I think the way we're sitting here, we all thought it would be a completely different year, including for the Defense Department. We had hoped to continue working with the veterans on the basis of defence with talks all over the country. It's tragic that you couldn't. But this is what it's all about. No more than a good start. That's what we said. We have worked out everything in the coalition agreement in the budget. Was it enough? No. We have never made a misunderstanding about that either. We have always said: it is a good start. I have even stated explicitly, in the direction of everyone, that we are currently unable to fulfil our constitutional task. Now, as a defence organization, we will never be able to fulfil the constitutional task on our own. We always have to do it in cooperation with other countries, but we are working on it successfully, with everyone in the organisation, from low to high. What have we done? We have inventoried what we encountered in those just over three years. We promised to make a defense vision to 2035. Unfortunately, that came a little later because of the corona crisis. It's been a long time since a long-term vision was made. That's what we promised. We have indicated that, if you look at what is happening in the world, the security situation around us is getting worse. That was Mr Beukker's second point. You may all have seen last week what the AIVD has done about the Russians in the Netherlands. I'm sure you've seen what happens to hacking. So you see that even in a country like us, the threat changes and increases. On the threat analysis, we have made our long-term vision, as requested by the Chamber. We lay there, with the entire Defense Organization, that our organization must change. We need to be high-tech and information-driven, we need to be a reliable partner and protector, and we need to work more intensively. There is no other way to do that in this world, where demography also changes. That's not moving on to another government. Of course, the \"what\" we have indicated. We all agree on that. We are already working on this, according to the three characteristics and the ten principles of design. We've been working on it since the day we established it with the whole organization. As far as we are concerned, extra money is included, because it is not enough, but regardless of whether we would get extra money as a Defence Organisation in a subsequent period, we all agree, with the whole organisation, that we should work differently. That's written down. And what has never happened before, I say in the direction of Mr Beucker, is that Defence has made clear so explicitly, well before the elections, what is really going on with the lack of money in the organisation. I am truly proud that we have managed this with the cabinet. We've made it so explicit that everyone can make their choices. You now know how much it costs to meet the 2% for NATO. That's what we reported. I fully agree, moreover, that we must comply with this and that the signature of our Prime Minister is now underneath it. We made that explicit. We have indicated what it costs to perform information-driven, what it costs to have a modern business operation and what it costs to be manoeuvrable. So we replicated it. Only if we meet all those things, we're, probably, tailored to the threats of today. But only in cooperation with other countries, because we can never do it alone. We have bent over in our Defence Vision, which Mr Beuker may have seen as well, to main task 1, because that is an important choice that we have made. The security of the Kingdom and the alliance is a priority for us, in addition to the main task 3, which I will also comment on in response to Mrs Moonen."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-12-15-eerstekamer-4.u40", "speech text": "How can you rhyme with these things? You say \"I started fixing a little bit,\" but you see that the factor involved in the defense, the military, still leaves the organization too much. We have 9,000 vacancies; that's what this is about."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-12-15-tweedekamer-4.u144", "speech text": "In the time that I have been Prime Minister, healthcare spending has increased by many, many, many billions. They've gone up by many billions. There's no cuts in health care. The only thing we have to try to do with each other is to prevent the costs of care from rising more structurally than the growth of the economy. We all have to do that. Because if that's structural, then you end up with a problem. Then you'll either have to raise taxes and/or make sure you cut benefits on police, on defense. No one wants that either. That is a joint task. Mr Wilders also has this task. We have great care in the Netherlands. It is organised as efficiently as possible and of very high quality."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-12-16-tweedekamer-5.u125", "speech text": "But is there not yet any \"in the first line of defense,\" as the Minister calls it, of, for example, the ADR, to assess whether that tolerance limit is exceeded? Or is that just something the minister hasn't been working on?"}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2020-12-16-tweedekamer-7.u33", "speech text": "Thank you, Mr. Chairman. You're a young child. Curious and with an open mind you look into the world. Playing with boyfriends and girlfriends. Have fun at school. At home, loving parents wait and you feel completely safe. In short, life is laughing at you. Unfortunately, this was not a reality for a group of children. They grew up in an unsafe situation. I'm thinking about the story of a girl who played out in the sixties. I can imagine her being picked up at home, getting into a car with strange people and being taken to a children's home, locking her stomach from all the uncertainty, grief and fear and not getting a bite through her throat. That's what I suffer from when I'm under stress, like today. I try to eat little bites and choose food I like. Not the little girl. She was forced to eat hard-handedly. This little girl... let's call her Mrs. Jansen... She still suffers from the consequences every day. I was shocked by these and many other stories in the De Winter Committee's report. I'm stunned that this could have happened. Mr. Chairman. I would like to thank Mr De Winter and his committee for their listening and extensive research into the abuses in youth care. At the request of the Chamber, hearing impaired and visually impaired people were also included in the investigation. The report shows that that is right. Now, one and a half years later, we finally come to talk about the investigation. And it's about time. I agree with previous speakers and wish victims, relatives and families a great deal of strength in this debate. Because we're talking about defenseless kids who we had to put out of our homes to protect them from a dangerous situation at home. But instead of offering them a safe environment, we took them to places some of which have nightmares for the rest of their lives. Fortunately, most shelters offer a lot of love, attention and care. Yet there are still places where things go wrong, where children are at risk. And that's unacceptable. Mr. Chairman. I hope that Mrs Jansen will now receive the aftercare she deserves, because the survey shows that 36% of the victims do not know where to find this aftercare. The government must ensure that these people can find and get aftercare. After all, the government is partly responsible for the victimisation of people like Mrs Jansen. That is why I ask the directors whether a central information point is not too passive. How can we help these victims more actively and shake hands? Can numbers indicate what has already been achieved in aftercare? How many people have been approached? How many people take advantage of the offer? Aftercare is the least we can do, of course, in addition to recognition and apology. Because they want to see that gross mistakes have been made and they want to see that the stories are not forgotten. The government has dropped huge amounts of money in youth care. Victims' confidence is fragile or broken. It is a good thing that excuses are at the forefront, but as a political figure we must also show that we are continuing to address abuses in youth care, with all the attention that this deserves. We need to achieve results with the recommendations of the report, such as improving monitoring. When I read what progress has been made, I feel that, according to the cabinet, little needs to be changed. Monitoring will remain risk-driven and reactive, despite the fact that the committee recommends otherwise. I therefore ask the Minister what other steps have been taken in concrete terms as a result of this report. What has been said: from now on, are we going to do this differently? It is a good thing that children in closed youth care can talk to a trusted person on a weekly basis, but how is it ensured that in other forms of care the children are talked about instead of about them? Kids should be able to tell their stories safely. Mr. Chairman. In addition to political excuses and actions, practical things can make a huge contribution to recognition. From letters I understand that peers do not feel heard, that they are concerned about whether the recommendations are not being dealt with too voluntarily. My colleague W\u00f6rsd\u00f6rfer also asked about it. I would therefore like to hear from the directors how they view this, and also when, for example, we can expect that documentary and what the developments of the monument are. In addition, I know that the majority of the victims believe that financial support should be equal for all, and that it should primarily go hand in hand with adequate aftercare or at least a conversation. It is good that the \u20ac5,000 scheme as compensation for victims will start from 2021. However, I would ask the Minister: how is this concession not going to cause a lot of hassle, for example because the application is too cumbersome? Finally. Let us take a first step today to restore confidence, hopefully. We owe it to all the victims that we take action as a government. We must show decisiveness in the recognition, in the aftercare, the supervision. This report should therefore never disappear in the drawer, because it sketches shocking stories that we have to keep telling. What has happened to Mrs Jansen and all those others must be prevented at all costs."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-01-08-eerstekamer-3.u250", "speech text": "Mr. Chairman. I was going to say something about those short-term statements. I think that's good. Mr Janssen was right to ask for this. One of them has been brought forward and that is very important. I would just like to quote the judge, who says: \"Although a more specific legal basis is conceivable and optimally desirable, in the opinion of the Court of Justice, this cannot, however, lead to the conclusion that this is an unmistakable non-binding regulation.\" The complicated thing is that as a minister, I have always said that I do not respond to judgments. So this is a bit complicated, but I still want to do a certain degree of tea leaves reading. This is due to my former self-defense, although it is beautiful here attorney's practice, which focused a lot on short-term cases. I see a single judge here in the room who will recognize that. Someone is looking for Mrs De Boer, of course, who has to make an assessment, actually of a so-called debt collection risk, at the point of: what happens if I point out and what happens if I turn down, and can I reverse it later or what are the consequences in the meantime? The most famous statement we always had for interns to make that clear was the lawyer of a kind of foundation like Natuurmonumenten who started a shortcut in the 1980s to prevent the Vietnam forest from being cut down and given a date for the shortcut a week later. The municipality just drove the bulldozers to it and on the day of the brief deal those trees were gone. Then the President of the Court of First Instance said, \"Now I can't do anything, sorry, 'cause those trees are gone.\" This is without prejudice to the fact that such a person or such a foundation can then initiate a compensation procedure, but why don't you measure the damage if those trees have disappeared like woods in the fireplace of the municipal staff. Now back to this briefcase. It's always a preliminary assessment. What I read in the very sharp judgments of the judge so far is that he very much recognizes the importance of public health, but that he, therefore, quoted that piece of \"although I would like a real legal basis more,\" perhaps in the light of the whole adopted yesterday in the House of Representatives, gives us some room. That means that we should still be able to establish this legal basis against that virus in the vote today in all wisdom, with all understanding that you, as a Chamber, say that the motions will not be tabled until Tuesday, because you can then consult your political groups on this matter. I would also like to say something, because I think that this is a good consideration before I start the reply and the motions. I'm gonna quote you one more time. The court has also considered that the quote \"quote' is a temporary condition that is required for aircraft on board an aircraft \"in the case of aircraft \"in the case of aircraft \"in the case of the Netherlands': \"If that condition cannot be met, the return must be postponed for some time in the interest of public health until that condition can still be met'. I would like to give it to you, Mr President, and to your Members, before I come to paragraph 5 and so on, because once again we hear someone else, not just someone else, but the independent judge who reflects on it in that way and who, in particular, understands that that virus called one of your members a rascal, with the best of intentions, but I think it is sometimes a scumbag that forces us to do what we are doing right now. To conclude, and then I shall turn to the questions: there is still the importance of voting today, really today, on the legislative proposal."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-01-14-tweedekamer-7.u39", "speech text": "Pig heads hate everyone, at least most of the parties in this house. That's not what the discussion is about either. You do not need to repeat history here by saying what cultural background people have done good things with here. But if we cannot simply discuss in this House that there are forces going on that are violating democracy, which are going against our Constitution, because that would be too incriminating, then we are wrong about each other. There are parties here in this house that are going the extreme way. But if we can't talk about the twenty mosques out of the 500 that we have to worry about as ordinary, normal, moderate parties, then we're having the wrong discussion. Then I want to stay away from the discussion as to whether there are 12 or 13 or 20. So my very friendly appeal is: don't sit in the defense line; don't sit in the \"people are pathetic\" corner. Because that doesn't solve anything. We need to find the forces to mobilise people and help people like your uncle and moderate Muslims to provide that reply, where they often don't feel that possibility right now. Money flows can play a role in this, but there are so many more facets. That would be so much more service, I think, so it's actually more of a friendly call."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-01-19-eerstekamer-9.u288", "speech text": "My question concerns the combination with the Lower House elections. The Minister says now that it is far from possible for all referenda to be realized. If it happens to be just before an election, you combine it. But that will really be a small minority. This means that it does not apply to most referendums. And so the problem of the threshold remains. There is no data available other than that scientific data that we have collected here through the experts. Those experts say that it is to be expected that referendums with a height of 40% are not feasible. The minister seemed to protect that there are other scientific insights. Which ones are they? I don't think there are any. But I like to hear it when there are. Secondly, that combination would therefore be possible. That was a bit of Mr Van Raak's last line of defense to say: that would allow you to reach that threshold. But if that is not possible, then it is a recipe for disappointment. What is the Minister's response to this?"}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-01-19-eerstekamer-9.u476", "speech text": "Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First of all, congratulations to Mr Raven on his maiden speech. Very welcome to this room. We hope to be able to work with him as a group of the Labour Party. Thank you to the initiator, Mr Van Raak, who has indeed defended his proposal with fire. And thank you also to the Minister for answering the questions. It is, of course, special that we hold a debate in the First Chamber on such an important subject. It is about representative democracy. There is also a review role of the Upper House. It is about a constitutional proposal that has been dealt with in the House of Representatives, it is about looking at it again. I therefore believe that the First Chamber should have every freedom to look at all aspects. It has often been said: yes, but you must also take into account that two-thirds majority. That is a secondary consideration for me. Of course you have to take it into account. But first of all, what does this proposal do, why is it desirable, how does it work in practice and is it feasible? We see two people sitting behind the table here, I have said it before, one as a counselor and the other as an advisor. Although the defense was incredibly beautiful, it seems a bit like it didn't go very well. Mr Van Raak also said that this threshold should not have been applied to me, and I think that the level of it is too high anyway, but yes it is. The minister's keeping himself a little more on the level, because she's an advisor. If you have to talk about something that is essential for the shaping of parliamentary democracy, then it is difficult that there are two people who do not really fully defend it, who guide and advise it more. I think that a great deal of attention has been paid to the threshold of outcome. Many say it's too high. Several experts have called them unfeasible and unrealistic. Mr Verkerk said: it is also very important that we take a good look at the constitutional part here. I very much agree with him. I appreciate his consideration of putting that aspect so prominently. However, I have already hinted at the fact that, of course, a state committee has put these constitutional considerations in addition to behavioral scientific considerations and looked at what is the best compromise there. At that time, he chose to give strong advice. That opinion was unanimously delivered, also by a member with the Christian Union as a background, who defended that proposal for a corrective legislative referendum. To achieve this, they have said: because it is indeed an important addition to representative democracy, that threshold must also be high. No one, not even our group, says that this threshold should not be firm. Only, according to most experts, the threshold of outcome currently contained in the proposal is too high. In fact, all the experts we have heard say that it is far too high and unrealistic. As a result, a pacifier referendum is soon being mentioned. Now all kinds of solutions have been devised. That has just been referred to. Same as the elections to the House of Representatives. The discussion shows that this is actually unrealistic. Once or twice, that will happen, but usually not. That's not in the proposal. Another solution was: more referendums one day. Yeah, you can do that, but you can't control that. It's an initiative from the people, so you can't just say: well, then so be it. If it happens to be two initiatives close to each other, you can keep them on the same day. However, it is far from certain that no investigation will indicate that this will result in a turnout similar to the turnout at the national elections, which always raises the question of national power. That always leads to a much higher turnout. It has itself been said that a distinction must be made between large and small laws. Big laws aren't that fast and they'll come into the process a little later. Perhaps Mr Van Raak could explain again whether that distinction is realistic? The Minister also said: a second reading and, at the same time, if you think it is not going to work out a new version in a first reading. So you're working on the second reading of this proposal and you're already gonna change that. When you're doing that, it already shows you've taken something you're right about saying isn't right. And that's a little bit above the discussion here. Mr Kox proposed a creative solution: the division based on Article 137 of the Constitution. The Minister said: I do not think that is very realistic. The main proposal is not in it. It will be an imperfect proposal and therefore probably not realistic. I do not know by whom, but a letter has been promised on Mr Kox's proposal. Well, let's wait and see. We'll take that letter into account in our final consideration. But that does not mean that you cannot at the same time argue for the novelle as we did in the motion tabled by Mr Ganzevoort. It is said about this novella that at the same time it leads to four years' delay. Mr Van der Linden has already said that it may be possible to speed things up. Why couldn't this be tried? I also really call on you to try to realize that novelle, taking into account the reasonableness of Members of Parliament who are open to new arguments. Against the possible delay of four years, you may also have a pacifier referendum for four years. I wouldn't really want that. Finally. The Labour Party's group is very much in favour of a corrective legislative referendum. I said the same thing in my speech this morning. We would have liked to give our vote to the original legislative proposal of the initiators. However, it has changed so much that you really have to ask yourself whether you still have to support this. A far too high threshold makes the referendum in fact impossible, shows distrust of the citizens and has thus become a recipe for disappointment. An improvement in that referendum law is therefore very much needed. We do not want a pacifier and hence our call for a novelle."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-01-19-tweedekamer-4.u68", "speech text": "It is to be appreciated that Mr Dijkhoff is the first speaker in this debate to begin with a piece of self-reflection. I hope we will see that more in the debate. I kind of missed that Friday at the press conference and just before the statement, so I hope that's gonna come out a little bit more from Vak-K as well. Mr Dijkhoff replied to Mrs Marijnissen's first question on self-reflection: we have sometimes had to make choices in recent years and we did not make them out of luxury. But it's about access to justice. I just looked up a quote from Mr. Teeven, who was Secretary of State at the Ministry of Justice on behalf of the VVD. He said, \"It was no longer a question of intertwining criminal law. That's when I focused on cutting back on the law. It's another way of achieving the same thing. If you don't give a lawyer too much time, it won't be that much with that defense.\" That is what Secretary of State Teeven said, who was responsible for Justice and for the access of Dutch people to justice. Speaking of self-reflection, I would like to ask Mr Dijkhoff how he looks back on that kind of quotes and whether he agrees with me that the VVD in Rutte I and Rutte II has deliberately reduced access to the law for many Dutch people."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-01-19-tweedekamer-4.u234", "speech text": "Something more precise. Again, the VVD is about who is the leader of the VVD, but it is actually more about the political and moral judgment of the Prime Minister himself, of Mark Rutte. How does he look at his own performance in this whole thing? His entire defense was built around the fact that he said he was responsible, but not involved. Now he says, \"I was involved, too.\" Does that change the way he looks at himself, the way he is responsible in this case and the consequences he must have? Is he the one who's capable of running that whole recovery operation of the welfare state?"}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-01-21-tweedekamer-2.u2", "speech text": "Mr. Chairman. The still high number of positive tests and the emergence of worrying new variants of the coronavirus require the cabinet to take even more far-reaching measures, additional measures in which, of course, nobody is going to jump. The mutating virus is and remains a huge threat to our public health. With that threat, the signal readings are far out of sight. Our defense strategy is also in behavior. With new variants on the lurk, the pressure on the care will only increase. We now have less vision and insight into the virus with the new variants and so something has to be done. Mr. Chairman. The VVD sees a curfew as a very heavy one, but with pain in the heart it is necessary to take action. And yes, I understand that there is a lot of feeling and emotion involved in such a measure, including in my group. But fortunately, I also see understanding and acceptance in society. And yes, I also understand that the cabinet is introducing this measure now, precisely to prevent worse; proactively rather than reactively after we have flown further off the bend because of many more infections, because of those infectious variants. Mr. Chairman. A curfew and a further limitation of visitation to one person are huge steps, but we have to do this, for example for our children. The long closing of schools has a big effect on our children. Their learning retardation is getting bigger and bigger. Vulnerable children are becoming even more vulnerable. It is precisely because we have many questions from our society that the cabinet also has a duty to explain the usefulness, necessity and effectiveness of the measures. It requires more communication than it has so far. Such a curfew also calls for appropriate solutions for people who may be in trouble, for clarity and clarity for those who, because of their work, care or other necessities, have to be outdoors. Mr. Chairman. The VVD welcomes the presentation of a broader package of measures, but the existing measures should also be better respected. The VVD finds it unacceptable that there are still employers asking their employees to come to work if they can also work at home. The cabinet announces once again that employers should be advised to comply more closely with homework. This should really be a little bit tighter. Where necessary, action can and should be stepped up. Mr. Chairman. It is a good thing that passengers on incoming flights from countries at risk will be subject to stricter controls, but why do we not have these checks on other transport with which one can enter the Netherlands? The VVD likes to see this happen. We would also like to see an effect of the quarantine obligation soon. The intention has been there for months now, I think we were already talking about it in August."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-01-21-tweedekamer-2.u118", "speech text": "If this is the Prime Minister's defense of pushing people down the throats of the greatest freedom restriction ever, at least in recent years, what am I saying? This Minister's story is really a story of nothing. Do you think you can convince the Netherlands more here, with three sentences and three minutes, and then say: stay home if I want to? Madam President. It can really be described with no pen. It is unnecessary to introduce it; there are many alternatives to it. It's careless and disproportionate. And let me say, Mr President, that I want to do this; it may take some time to say a few things about it. First of all, the comparison you make in your letter and the OMT in his letter with France does not go far enough. In France, when one came up with that curfew, the schools and shops were open, and still are open. Whatever you think of that curfew, if you do it from an open society, it has natural effect. In the Netherlands, shops and schools are closed. So the difference and comparison with France doesn't go away. Madam President. Then the reviews. And I hope, frankly, that journalists will do the same, because I went through that literature with a number of colleagues last night; I am not a scientist, but I did. Then we see, as I said, the Prime Minister also confirms that the fourth piece in the literature, by Baunez et al., has not been peer-reviewed. I remember that Mrs Agema, when she came up with an investigation last year, was about wiped out at the briefing by Mr Van Dissel, because she dared to come up with an investigation that had not been peer-reviewed. And now it doesn't matter. Madam President. Then there are two other investigations. When you read it, there's just something completely different in it than what the cabinet says. In the literature of the second note it just says that the R without stay-at-home-order is widely interpreted; not only stay at home, but also the curfew is included, if you read that research you can easily stay below 1, if you do so without that curfew. Another study says and shows that a national lockdown.. and underneath it is understood the curfew... hardly has any effect, and that it is mainly about people who meet each other. And then there are two fresh investigations, which have been peer-reviewed: one by Brauner, from November last year, and one by 5 January this year, from Ben-David. They both say that the extra effect of curfew is almost negligible, if you take but also those other measures that restrict people at home in the contacts, and that a curfew is not necessary for that. So it's gossip. You're not even going into it. You do not give the Chamber any peer-reviewed, uncontrolled tests, and when we do, you will wipe us out of the Chamber. And it's clear from all the research that it doesn't add up. The comparison with France is limp, because the Netherlands is already locked; we already have the worst. And I'd like to ask the Prime Minister, don't do it. If you want to do so, try all the measures that you have proposed today, including all the measures that I may disagree with, for example, that people should receive only one person, at home or outside or whatever. Then start with that. And don't come with that horse medicine right away, because it's probably not necessary at all. The big profit comes from those measures, not the curfew. Have you considered that and are you prepared to do so?"}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-01-21-tweedekamer-2.u264", "speech text": "Just a little defense, though. Once, it may be that one scientist is more gloomy than the other. I do not think Jaap van Dissel is so gloomy, but it will be that there are also gloomy Jaap van Dissels. He's not. But also look at Jacco Wallinga, the model of RIVM. If you look at the median of expectations since March, for example with the pressure on intensive care and the pressure on hospitals, it has proved frighteningly accurate. It was frighteningly accurate, even so that at some point we said we'd hold back the sheets, see if they didn't secretly adjust the underlying trajectory to the new numbers. Well, it wasn't; it turned out to be exactly right. It is not for nothing that Jacco Wallinga is also seen internationally as one of the leading modellers on this issue. Unfortunately, he's right so far."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-01-26-eerstekamer-8.u44", "speech text": "I'd just like to make it a little easier on the minister, because she doesn't have to convince me. I think it's a consideration I understand in these particular circumstances. I ask her if she understands the sanding that Mr Nicola\u00ef is pointing to and which I have asked for. There is, after all, something about this inequality. If we acknowledge that with each other, we don't have to say \"now we have to do it this time.\" Sure! If we use this situation to really reflect on it once again in principle, isn't there just a little more inequality in it, as Mr Nicola\u00ef rightly points out, than the Minister is using in her defense?"}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-01-26-tweedekamer-25.u67", "speech text": "Madam President, thank you very much. \"Demonstrants attack cops with stones, molotov cocktails, bats and knives.\" \"Demonstrants throw rocks and heavy fireworks at the police.\" \"Motor agent flees from rioters.\" \"The mayor's house is extra secure.\" \"Relschoppers squander hospital during the change of day and evening shifts.\" It's some headlines from the past few days, shocking headlines. It was the reality that our country had to deal with in recent days. This only fits sharp disapproval. Only adequate penalties can be applied here. Unfortunately, the reality with which aid workers and other people have too often to deal with a public task is this kind of thing. We've been talking for years about something finally having to happen. Well, the SGP welcomes this bill if at least one step in the right direction, I'll give it up. It's also a clear signal: you don't touch the helpers with your hands. \"Help workers\" is very broad for a while, because cops are of course a different category than aid workers, but we all bring them in for a while. It is totally unacceptable to attack those persons who are designated to provide assistance to citizens, to ensure security and to ensure public order, and to prevent them from carrying out their work. Behind that uniform and underneath that hat we forget it sometimes a person is hiding, a man or a woman, a person who often has a family that hopes that Mom or Dad will return home safely after his or her shift. That's what it's really about. People who perform a public task should be able to do their work undisturbed in order to ensure the safety and health of others, of everyone in the Netherlands. If they are attacked and/or if violence is applied against them, it is contrary to any sense of justice as far as the SGP Group is concerned if a bald community service is imposed in response. A community service is a punishment for less serious crimes or crimes under mitigating circumstances. Violence and aggression against people with a public role are not included in the SGP Group, certainly not. The SGP Group therefore supports the extension of the public service ban in order to tackle violence against people with a public service. Mr. Chairman. Research has shown that between 2015 and 2020 hundreds of bald community service sentences were imposed for the abuse of persons with a public task. When you read that, you think to yourself: This can't be true, can it? If we say \"get your hands off them,\" it can't be true that this is a trend. There are even cases of aggravated assault among these crimes. It is not for the aid workers to explain that at one point we are all applauding for the care and that a few months later a hospital will be crowned. Aid workers deserve our respect. So let us show this in our legislation, and let us severely punish the violation of security limits. Mr. Chairman. The SGP Group considers it important that, in addition to good legislation, adequate and effective enforcement can be carried out against suspects of violence against persons with a public role. During the changes in the year, but also during the riots of last week, it has been found that violence against people with a public task is mainly carried out in groups. It is not always possible to verify during police intervention which persons are guilty of what kind of public assault. Can the Minister indicate how this bill provides for effective enforcement? A second question, in addition: does the Minister intend, for example, to equip policemen with bodycams by default in the event of suspected riots? Boas are also regularly dealt with by violence. They are not sufficiently equipped to take adequate action against this. They often have to choose flights out of body retention, instead of tackling the violence. In a sense, they lack even the most basic self-defense weapons. Is the Minister prepared to reconsider the equipment of boas, also in the interests of their own safety? Mr. Chairman. Then I come to the final point of consideration: the violation of public authority. I read in the legislative proposal that the Minister's intention is that acts of violence against police or enforcers should be regarded as serious crimes. The particular seriousness is that, in addition to the damage to the physical integrity of these victims, the violence committed also affects public authority, hampers the exercise of the task, or creates a risk of such an obstacle under the threat of physical violence. The SGP Group notes that not only physical violence against aid workers affects public authority. Nor can the threat of private servants be tolerated. This can be expressed, for example, in the scratches of a private car or the puncture of the tyres, or of the children's bicycle tires. If people come home with a public task, they should not have to worry about the safety of their families. Is the Minister prepared to extend the legislative proposal to protect the private sphere of persons with a public role? In addition, the destruction of goods and the disabling of vehicles used by persons with a public service mission undermines public authority in view of the safety risks involved. Victims can't be transported in a destroyed ambulance. Cops can't move in a cop car set on fire. Obstacles to assistance are not a minor crime on which a bald community service should rest. You're putting people in danger. That is why a strong signal from the legislator is needed. The amendment I have tabled is intended to supplement this bill. I would like to hear the Minister's response to this amendment. Mr. Chairman. I'm closing up. Aid workers and law enforcement deserve our appreciation, especially now. We must be able to rely on them in times of need; let us ensure that we have solid legislation that they can rely on. That is all expressed in extremely human terms. In the end, we are talking about a higher level of confidence, as you all know, and I would also like to convey it from my politically reformed background. Thank you, Mr. Chairman."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-01-27-tweedekamer-4.u110", "speech text": "Those agents from Germany and Belgium are going to have a bit of a life of their own. There is normal cooperation here in the border regions. That's what this is about. In this normal cooperation in the border regions we support each other from time to time. It's not like Germans suddenly show up in Sneek or Scheveningen. But in the border regions Germany, Belgium and the Netherlands help each other. That is what is referred to here. Then about the defense deployment: there is. The Royal Marechaussee is currently helping in a fantastic way. The police and the Royal Marechaussee are working very closely together. I am truly unlikely to be impressed by what they have shown together over the last few days. We sincerely hope that it will be less after last night, but we do not know that. It may be that this is going to go on for a while. We hope not, but then we will all join forces with the police and the Royal Marechaussee. If it is necessary in the future to make more use of the Defense Department, we will certainly do so. We have done this in the past, for example when it comes to logistical support or the clearing of streets or squares, for example at the big demonstration in The Hague. And it could go on. That is always a decision in agreement between the Minister of Justice and Security on the one hand and the Minister of Defence on the other. There's all the rules for that. The mayors have an important role to play in asking for it. But at the moment, the conclusion of the police, as well as the mayors, is that as we are doing with each other now, the police can keep things under control. At present, there is no added value in making greater use of the defense than we do. But it's not taboo. If it's necessary in the future, we're going to take a serious look at it, but now it's not necessary."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-02-03-tweedekamer-3.u20", "speech text": "Mr. Chairman. We have said it before: the government and ICT, that is not a happy combination. In itself that is an understatement, but the government has surpassed itself here, in a negative sense. This is no longer a privacy leak; this is the wide opening of all the windows and doors with the warm invitation: come in. And that of a government that has declared cybersecurity one of its priorities. A government that self-defenses the data of its citizens. Last week in Question Time the Minister really played down the matter: yes, there is a problem, but no, it is not as bad as you say. But in last night's letter that was really nuanced. The systems are not designed on a task of this magnitude; they are designed on original GMD tasks and not on a pandemic. For example, GD employees may have access to an unimaginable amount of private data that they should not have access to at all. In addition, people have been rushed, without significant screening, sometimes without a vog; a walhalla for criminals who want evil with other people's data. It's never been that easy. The government itself has spared them the trouble of a hack. Well considered, it's a miracle it took so long before anyone with this data came along. In the facts, we read that CoronIT was mentioned in May last year: it meets the requirements of the safe use of citizens' data. What was this statement based on at the time? On 16 September, Nieuwsuur reports that test staff could access data that were not necessary for them. A day later, the inspection reports that more and more stability and interconnections are emerging, reducing ICT bottlenecks. Between May and September, according to the facts, there was little evidence of safety problems. However, the inspection talks about bottlenecks. In the meantime, there must have been signals. Can the Minister comment on this? And is there still a white key? We note from the letter that short-term measures will not be implemented until March. Why hasn't that happened before? So we have two months left with an unsafe system. Only this week will access and search options be restricted. Why hasn't that happened before? And does this leak mean that the data of people who come in for regular GGD tasks are also on the street? As far as we are concerned, the key question is: who is ultimately responsible for this tragedy? Is that the chairman, Mr Rouvoet, who is ultimately responsible for the functioning of the GGDs where signals from staff have been ignored? Or is it this minister? Mr. Chairman. People are worried about their data. It's clear that data has been resold. Their concerns are therefore only justified. What if criminals succeed in their intent to take out loans in the name of these people? What are you going to do to limit the damage? As far as we are concerned, reference to websites is really not enough. Who's gonna compensate for the damage? Who provides legal assistance? We just received a letter from RIVM. What's that supposed to mean? What does this mean? Can the Minister answer that? In short, Mr President, this is the umpteenth time that this US Secretary of State is out of control. The feeling creeps us out that it's all starting to get a buddy too big. It seems that he is bluffing away from the problems and that does not create confidence, not in the House of Representatives, but certainly not among the citizens. The point is that people have confidence and that they can continue to get to test streets and not be afraid of losing their data. Thank you."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-02-03-tweedekamer-7.u58", "speech text": "Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you to Mr Nijboer and his support for the reply. Very handsome, completely out of mind. It is very nice that we can deal with and adopt this bill before the elections. I wish Mr Nijboer every success in the First Chamber with the defense. I'm sure that's as smooth as it is here. We have one motion. It is about lowering or determining as the government's initial rents, because we see that there are major problems, especially in the free sector. When someone moves, hundreds of euros often come on top. The result is that the middle rent for a lot of people is really no longer payable. Since we are all currently writing election programmes and are doing good things about them at the CDA, for example, at this point, we have been inspired to make a motion. 'Cause let's forge the iron now that it's hot. [[Motion]] [[The Chamber,]] [[heard the debate,]] [[noting that many tenants in the free sector have to deal with high rents due to the absence of rent protection;]] [[Whereas, as a result of excessive increases in initial hire, it is becoming impossible for more and more people to find an affordable house in the middle hire;]] [[points out that it is desirable to include rental prices in part of the free rental sector in the housing valuation system;]] [[calls on the Government to prepare for a decision to allow rent protection through the housing valuation system in the free rental sector,]] [[and goes to the order of the day.]] [[This motion has been proposed by Mr Smeulders, Mr Beckerman and Mr Kuik. It seems to me that their submission is sufficiently supported.]] [[She's getting No. kst-35488-11]]"}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-02-11-tweedekamer-21.u8", "speech text": "Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I see this is supposed to be the last U.S.O. of the Defense Department. I also liked what Mrs Belhaj said. It is true that it is often about life and death, which we debate in the Defense Department. Then it is also good to do that with each other in a good way. The agenda is to prepare for next week's meeting of NATO Defence Ministers. Mrs Karabulut spoke in particular about the fact that the Netherlands is holding 80 extra soldiers to send to Afghanistan, if necessary, following the consultations we have with the Germans. That's because the security of our military in Afghanistan is paramount. The cabinet cannot and does not want to take any of that away from it, not even in a missionary form. We cannot make any concessions. This preparation of 80 military personnel has also been indicated in the annotated agenda.... is a precautionary measure. We're doing this for the security of our troops in Afghanistan. We make sure that they are up-to-date, ready and able to be deployed at the time there is a need to deploy them. That's pure and self-defense only. Mrs Karabulut said that the Americans were going to phase out after 1 May. That's part of what the Defense Ministry is about. As you know, the government has changed in the United States and we need to talk about this again. But we were in Afghanistan all year round anyway, and that is also necessary in view of the situation. We have always said with the support of the Chamber: we are going in together, we are working together and we are going out together. That's condition-based, because we don't make agreements about the duration. We also argued, with a large part of your Chamber, that the Americans suddenly said so, even though the President did so by tweet at the time, after we had spoken to the ministers. This is really about the security of our troops. If necessary, the commander will press the button. That is actually what the cabinet needs to be for and what we should be for together with the Chamber. So they're ready in case they need to. I must therefore simply discourage this motion. Even if it is true that we should withdraw, it may be unsafe, because we are seeing more attacks by the Taliban. And if we had to withdraw on or after 1 May, we would still need a lot of logistical operations, for which people would have to go to Afghanistan first. Moreover, in view of the situation, 1 May would already be impossible to achieve. But the people for that logistics operation must also be able to operate in safety, and that is what these people are for. So I must discourage this motion."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-02-18-tweedekamer-2.u346", "speech text": "Mr. Chairman. The Prime Minister has made a huge mistake with the curfew; the whole of the Netherlands has seen it. And, unfortunately, he is not able to do that again today, which is a characteristic of him, to admit that he is being ridiculed and certainly not to withdraw that curfew, even though it is not nothing that the welfare court has said. In addition to saying \"it was the wrong law,\" the welfare court also said \"it was not proportionate.\" In other words, the freedom of Dutch people has been unduly restricted in recent weeks after 9 p.m. Let me say this to you, Madam President: our freedom has been unduly restricted in recent days. That's what this statement says. Whatever you find further from that curfew, there are people for it, there are people against it, here in the Chamber and in the country, until something else has been said on appeal, is the conclusion that we have been illegally home for a few weeks after 9 p.m. I do not understand that there has been no earthquake through this House of Representatives. I really don't understand that there's no earthquake... whatever you think of that curfew, it's gonna happen to you that you're not allowed out of your house on unlawful grounds after 9:00 p.m. Why, why, is the room not a lion here, but a lamb? Why are we taking this? I find it incomprehensible. Mr. Chairman. As I have just said, the appeal may also lead to the maintenance of the judgment of the Supreme Court of Appeal. In any case, I would like the appeal to be awaited before we vote on this law. I think that's very pure. Again, whatever you think of the arrangement, let's wait and see. And that could go both ways. On appeal it can be said that the Prime Minister, or the State, is right, and under that wrong law we are going to say that it is allowed. But it may also be that they say something else and have other considerations. So I want the Chamber to wait until there is a ruling on appeal, especially now that the cabinet itself simply refuses to state clearly that it thinks the basis of this law is better than that of the current law; that is also zero defense of this law. I've just seen it during my colleagues' interruptions. They don't even say that, if necessary, they think that law is better, with of course a legal trick, such as \"yes, the appeal applies.\" Hence, Mr. Chairman, I have the next motion. It's a motion addressed to the Chamber. I ask you to put this motion to the vote before we vote on the law. [[Motion]] [[The Chamber,]] [[heard the debate,]] [[does not vote on the proposal for a temporary limitation law in the open air covid-19 (35732) after the ruling of the court of appeal,]] [[and goes to the order of the day.]] [[This motion was tabled by Mr Wilders and Mr Krol. It seems to me that their submission is sufficiently supported.]] [[She's getting No. kst-35732-11]]"}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-02-19-eerstekamer-5.u184", "speech text": "Mr. Chairman. The Netherlands has been in a state of siege for almost a year. Our country is in the grip of elusive attackers: not visible, not audible and not tangible. A murdering army of snipers and transformers that mercilessly shoots at innocents, an army that then deviously transforms victims into soldiers of their own army and that regularly changes shape. More than a million Dutch were now directly victims of an attack in this guerrilla battle. Thousands are now dead and tens of thousands wounded. It is right that our government, since March last year, has put our country in the highest state of preparedness and mobilized all troops. I assume that this is done on the basis of Article 22 of the Dutch Constitution: the government is taking measures to promote public health. Far-reaching defence measures have now been taken with the agreement of most of our people and our Parliament. Unfortunately, it was not enough to defeat the attackers completely. This leads to a number of quacks who are now trying to undermine the authority of our OMT generals and slander our Prime Minister with pure personal attacks. With self-imagined truths, these charlatans undermine the science-based authority of the OMT and use it to activate demonstrations in some of the even inflammatory language, using the right of free speech. From a strategic defensive point of view, this may be a difficult side effect for the government of our rule of law, but not legally exceptional. The police's unnecessarily powerful response to the demonstrations was exceptional and led to an unnecessary rearguard fight with the demonstrators with large-scale destabilising riots. It was a culpable error of judgment on the part of the police and therefore also on the part of the government. This did not serve the fight against our real enemy, the murdering snipers. Besides, it was a waste of time. There is no point in opening a second front against quacks. They have always been there in history and history proves that in the end they shoot themselves in their own foot. The power of the scientific argument of our OMT generals is untouchable compared to the fake news of the self-appointed quasi-scientists. The people will soon recognize that and drive out the quacks in the upcoming elections with pitch and feathers. Back to the battle against the invisible army. Our defensive measures have not been sufficient so far, so our enemy has been in control of the whole country for months now. In fact, with new variants these last lines of defense are bombarded. Reason for the government to take a far-reaching defence measure against the advice of the Council of State by declaring war on the enemy in the form of the establishment of a curfew. That was a second culpable error of assessment, as this was not done on the right legal grounds. The quacks also play a dubious role in this. Instead of unitedly competing with the enemy, they seek loopholes in the law to make holes in our defense. In doing so, they share responsibility for the many unnecessary deaths and injuries which are likely to be regrettable. Mr. Chairman. Every victim is one too many. The government indicates that the curfew reduces the number of attacks combined with the limited visitation regime by as much as 8% to 13%. Measuring is knowing. Guessing dance school holders miss the punch line. Last week, 25,600 people were attacked by the enemy. In the week before the curfew was set, there were 37,000. A difference of 11,488, or 31% less. Without curfew, more people would have been attacked in the last week, based on estimates from the OMT, between 2.048 and 2.876. It's a substantial number of fewer victims, so somewhere there's something working. Mr. Chairman. Every victim is one too many. In the first wave I myself barely survived an attack by the enemy; many were less lucky. I'm not gonna let anyone get hurt like that. The charlatans make it look like the curfew is the heaviest cure in this war. However, everyone has a hard time, from hairdresser to wholesale shop, from catering to sports club and soccer supporters, from cultural organisations to large-scale event organizers, from youth organisations to fairground operators, because that is what the young people want to make use of. Moreover, when it comes to serious human consequences, the most serious measure was to lock up the older generation in the elderly and nursing homes for months. They had to stay in their room for months from four to three, were not allowed to go outside and had to fight in great loneliness and without contact with children or grandchildren. They were trapped like rats and had nowhere to go, while the virus was brought in from the outside by nursing because of the lack of personal protective equipment. Very often that struggle in death ended in complete loneliness. You don't hear the quacks about that. Moreover, I believe that the latter is worthy of a parliamentary survey. Mr. Chairman. There's hope. D-day's here. We're getting help from the Allied troops who can use a new vaccination tool to defeat the enemy. This will take some time, even because of the petty management and execution of the government side. Until then, the government should be able to take all the measures necessary to defeat our enemy, if necessary with a new law for curfew, but with a restriction that this can only be done within the constitutional procedures in force in our country. The fact that the government did not involve the First Chamber in this case does not fit in with those frameworks and that is the third error of assessment. In doing so, the government, in particular the Minister of Justice, collects three yellow cards in one file. I call on the Government and in particular the Minister of Justice to reflect on their own achievements in this matter. Thank you."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-02-23-eerstekamer-3.u232", "speech text": "Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Last Friday, in the debate on curfew, I noticed that our country is at war with an invisible guerilla army of snipers and transformers and my group called on our government to take all necessary steps to defeat the enemy. To this end, I could limit my contribution today, as the present bill aims to extend our country's defense tactics over the next three months. But that would be a little too easy, because we are dealing with a reduction in fundamental rights. Nothing is for nothing, so I come to the end of my speech with a motion. Crisis times are characterised by the need to anticipate changing situations faster than usual. The First Chamber must also move and accelerate in this. I think we're gonna do the same. In other words, the well-known solid opinions on the country's legislation and implementation put into turbo-holding and projecting on rapidly changing social conditions. In these times, the rigid character can be reduced. The OSF notes that the support base for the covid measures is diverging. Citizens, businesses and institutions want to see perspective. The unequal treatment between different sectors and even within sectors is becoming increasingly problematic. The call for equal treatment is becoming more and more pregnant. The present extension of the law does not provide sufficient perspective. That is why today the First Chamber must press the government for a rapid change of course, with the motto being: to do what is necessary, to scale faster where possible. Last Friday, I concluded my speech on curfew with the observation that there is hope in the form of new vaccination weapons, which can finally defeat the enemy in the coming months. As a result, we are in a situation where an increasingly large part of the Netherlands is liberated, while another part still has to live under the yoke of far-reaching defence measures based on the temporary law. That is a little encouraging perspective, from several points of view. After all, vaccinees are safe, 50-minners are in little danger in the event of an attack and risk groups can still guarantee their own safety through risk-avoidance behaviour. My group therefore calls for this impasse to be broken as quickly as possible and for an integrated recovery plan to be drawn up, such as a Marshall Plan, so that people who have been liberated can return to freedom and risk groups that are not yet definitively protected can participate in society as normally as possible. Can we do that? Can the government draw up a Marshall plan as soon as possible to bring the Netherlands back to a normal society within two months, in which people can be together again, without keeping their distance and without that maleized mouth cap? That people can shake hands again, hug, give a kiss, put a hand around the shoulder. That that real, normal human contact can be restored. Have a dance on the dance floor, go out of your mind at an event or take a day trip together with the elderly in a fine full coach. That people enjoy life again! Mr. Chairman. England presented a new road map yesterday, Greece wants to allow vacations for vaccinees and at our universities there are test gardens with quick tests from home. There are also alternatives in development to find the way to normal through the separation of vulnerable and non-vulnerable. However, these plans are considered by the OMT to be insufficient in advance. Problem is asymptomatic cases, where there are no symptoms in the first days after the attack of the enemy, but snipers and transformers can already be active. However, there are certainly valuable elements in these proposals. The government should further develop this. Perhaps the sporting world offers an adequate alternative solution. Last months we could look jealously at the freedom of movement in some sports, such as Formula 1. In the middle of corona time, the enemy value was still full of fighting each other and in a victory they jumped each other around the neck without any restraint. Many people were wondering, why is that possible? Yes, Mr President, that was possible, because it has been shown that no major attack has occurred despite the far-reaching freedom of movement of athletes under and with each other. The proven answer to this sport method is: to create testing, testing, testing and bubbles. Perhaps a combination of these two systems is a solution. Create a total social bubble by testing, testing and testing. And preferably the results of such a daily test within five to ten minutes, so that people know where they stand and can start the day with a clean slate without infecting others. If everyone could test themselves in the morning or before the start of participation in society via a free quick test, one total and safe social bubble could be created for the Netherlands. Although these rapid tests do not yet provide 100% certainty, they offer a socially acceptable risk and could re-open closed shops, restaurants and restaurants directly and without danger. Negative tested: normal participation in social movement. Positively tested: asking discipline to stay home. And if necessary, you have just heard that in the contribution of the Party for the Animals, this can also be done on the penalty of action by the chairman of a security region or a minister. Could an integral Marshall plan based on these principles provide sufficient relief to liberate the Netherlands? There's hope. Make our country an example for the whole world, the country or hope and glory. We call on the government to start a new spring on 21 March and to present an integral liberation and recovery plan to relieve the Netherlands of this war situation within two months."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-03-23-eerstekamer-16.u250", "speech text": "Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Kraken is not allowed; it is punishable. That's easy. To reassure Mrs. Bezaan... Oh, I don't see her now; then I can't reassure her. Then, to reassure her groupmates: my experience of cracking has been a while now, but that is not just a celebration, not even in my view and in my group. You're gonna run into a lot of shit. It is, by the way, a mixed picture; it is not just misery. But all that aside. The Minister claims that the rc may give more guarantees than the court hearing the interim measures. I think I'm gonna follow him in there. In any case, he gives more guarantees for the cracker, because he is a suspect, I really must say 'the person suspected of cracking', where the minister is right in saying that, and in any case, he can invoke all the rights and guarantees of criminal law. And indeed, if the judge commissioner is doing well, then those safeguards are fine. But then you won't have a quick procedure. That's exactly where it wrings here. That is exactly what the comments of experts on this law were about. Then the conclusion is: it costs a lot, including capacity, and it doesn't solve or at least doesn't solve enough what it needs to solve, namely acceleration. There is another small point I would like to make. That interim action works with the representation of the collective. The lawyer's just standing there on behalf of all the squatters. Criminal law is individual. So it has to be 10, 15, 20 times. The minister seemed to suggest that criminal law also works with collectives, but that is not the case. A lawyer can only say: I am speaking on behalf of client A, B and C. Then another point I wanted to make. The owner's legal status is weakened. I doubt it accelerates; if it accelerates, it is in the interests of the owner. But his status is weakened, while the squatter's position is strengthened. My next point. You can agree with the prosecution and the judiciary or not; that doesn't really matter, because they have to implement this law when it is passed. Of course they will. As the Minister himself said, they do so very carefully and qualityfully. That is why they say: do not do this to us, because this is not happening in that very fast way. Again, that is exactly the essence of their advice: we are going to do this carefully; we are going to do this carefully and full of tests, and that takes time. We have discussed all the elements that need to be met in the course of the debate. That's a lot different than a wiretap, a lot different. Then I come to my final point. That's just that I want to say thank you. I thought it was a nice, passionate debate. It was an energetic defense; I like that. That keeps us awake and indeed brings us to the core. It has not convinced my group; that is what I am saying. This will not be surprising, especially given the role of the First Chamber in terms of the quality of legislation. Mr. Koerhuis, good luck with your next term in the Chamber. We hope to see you back here. Mrs Van Toorenburg, thank you for the eleven years you have worked as a Member of Parliament. It was 11, wasn't it? Fourteen, in fact. Okay. Seven of them we have done together, and now we have done again today. I've done it with great pleasure. Thanks for all the good work."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-03-23-eerstekamer-3.u55", "speech text": "Thank you, Mr. Chairman. For my part, too, I congratulate the initiators on having been able to bring the bill to the First Chamber. Congratulations on the speedy answer to our questions. Maybe records were cracked here, too, and then cracked in a positive sense. Mr. Chairman. You can crack nuts and records, but no houses. It is therefore very important that strong action can be taken against persons who violate property rights of homeowners. Proposals that promote this can count on a warm welcome from the SGP, but does this also apply to this bill? Many questions have already been asked and questioned, and not by the smallest authorities: the Public Prosecutor's Office and the Council of Justice. The question even arises as to whether this bill will not primarily provide better legal protection for squatters. That would be a very harsh and undesirable outcome. Mr. Chairman. The bill is not entirely separate from the Amsterdam squatting problem, partly in relation to the appalling behavior of We Are Here. However, the desire to put an end to this kind of illegal practice must not cloud our vision for a possible ineffectiveness that takes us further away from home. I have the necessary questions about this effectiveness, and I would like to put them on behalf of the Christian Union. Mr. Chairman. The bill, I already said, looks mainly like the living carousel that the band We Are Here had a few years ago. However, that problem is no longer, or at least much less, at issue. In any case, the policy has been adapted in Amsterdam, where most squatters play, and the problem is more or less under control. Will this legislation not make the problems worse? Isn't it also a sign on the wall that the squatters themselves didn't interfere in the discussion surrounding this bill? They're not usually that timid. Or is it true that they do not have much to fear from this bill? Mr. Chairman. You will not be surprised that, when it comes to enforcing the planned ban on cracking, I attach great importance to the views of the public prosecutor. Their criticism weighs heavily. For example, they have pointed to increasing questions regarding the deployment of available detection capacity. Are we solving a burglary, a miserable vice case, or are we gonna get a squat cleared out? In by far the majority of cases, 70%, squatters now leave voluntarily. If squatters do not institute interim proceedings, they will be evacuated immediately after the end of the seven-day period. The new law weakens that position: evacuating becomes quite labour intensive for the criminal justice chain. That would be a very unwanted outcome, wouldn't it? The last thing we want is to saddle police, prosecutors and courts with more work. Now only files are made if interim proceedings have been instituted. So that is in about 30% of the cases, but that will have to be done in 100% of the cases, which a judge will also have to deal with. Is this increase in workload acceptable? According to the applicants, the additional workload is not too great. It also just came back through an interruption. I do have some questions about that. According to them, as I read in the note following the report, it would have been 22 additional sessions throughout the year in 2019 and 33 additional sessions in 2018. Do those numbers make sense? Are the figures given not to be taken into account for interim measures which have been withdrawn? Under the new legislation, all evacuation decisions must be submitted to the Judge Commissioner. I've been diving into history for a while. In the Amsterdam region alone, 560 buildings were creaked in the years 2014-2020. This means on average 80 squats per year and therefore 80 claims on the rc per year. That's a lot more than the proposers tell us. I would very much like a clear explanation of these numbers and the resulting workload. The prosecution has strongly pointed out to the applicants that a minimum dossier will not be sufficient. The judge commissioner is not a stamp machine and the house law is irreversible. The Court of Justice has also stressed that the Court Commissioner will not have to examine the matter in a marginal but full manner, since there is a balance between house law as guaranteed in the ECHR. Is this true and will it not be an inevitable waste of time? All the more so because forming a file will not be so simple, partly because it will have to be anticipated on any defenses of the squatters. The burden of proof lies with the prosecution as a result of this bill and not with the squatters. Next, the ability of the prosecution to act is affected by the fact that a prosecutor can no longer order an emergency evacuation himself. That is the reason behind the rc, with all the legal discussions that have taken place. Speaking more about the alleged time savings of the legislative proposal, the initiators say in the note following the report that instead of the current up to eight weeks, in the new procedure with the use of the Judge Commissioner in principle it takes 72 hours to evacuate. In this way, one writes in the note following the report, it becomes unattractive for the squatters to hop from building to building. But that's not right, is it? The judge commissioner has to make a decision within 72 hours. And he probably won't make it all the time. Afterwards, planning for evacuation must be made; police capacity must be released and so on. So that 72 hours is wishful thinking after all? Mr. Chairman. It will be clear that the SGP still has some hesitation about this bill. That's why I'm all the more looking forward to the answers."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-04-01-tweedekamer-3.u34", "speech text": "Thank you, Mr President. As Mr Van der Staaij rightly says, it is a special situation. We have seen this, and there is no defense there, although of course I hear it from Mr Rutte that Mr Rutte lied in front of the camera. He said for the whole of the Netherlands, when he was asked by the NIS whether someone was going to answer: no, nobody is going to do that. He also said: no, we did not talk about Mr Omtzigt. And Mr Omtzigt has been mentioned. He just lied. After ten years of Rutte, we now see Mr Rutte's lie transparently. He will be able to tell a story about Mr Omtzigt in a moment, but he lied to the Netherlands, because he did mention Mr Omtzigt. That is a disgrace, apart from the fact that he wanted to promote Mr Omtzigt away. Hence, with the greatest conviction you can have, the next motion. [[Motion]] [[The Chamber,]] [[heard the debate,]] [[declares confidence in the Prime Minister,]] [[and goes to the order of the day.]] [[This motion has been proposed by Mr Wilders.]] [[She's getting No. kst-35788-10]]"}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-04-01-tweedekamer-3.u796", "speech text": "One last question. It's about the governance culture, which I had a question about earlier. You indicated: When such a question comes, you say yes immediately. I can also imagine that you are a member of D66 and have worked for Mr Rutte for a long time. Then it's also nice to do this reconnaissance. It also evokes a bit of a club feeling. Mr Dijkhoff said in his farewell interview that, at the moment of club feeling, there is also a line of defense when problems arise. That feeling also comes up here a little bit, like it's happening here. I wonder how you look at that."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-04-01-tweedekamer-3.u1010", "speech text": "I think it's right. We too have lost. You asked us the same question. I understand that an election result gives rise to that, but your entire defense, your speech tonight, was built around media footage and not so much about the fact that it was just about the loss of the CDA. So I don't get it that well. If you say the media said it was an unstable mess... I do not like that, because you refer to post-Monday articles."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-04-01-tweedekamer-3.u1124", "speech text": "Thank you, Madam President. Two weeks after the elections, we have to establish that this reconnaissance phase has stalled. My confidence in Mr Rutte has suffered a great dent today. The distance between him and me is greater. I regret that, but I also resent him, especially in view of the role that the electorate has given us both: the recovery of the Netherlands in the crisis and after the crisis and the restoration of confidence in the rule of law and in politics. The way the reconnaissance has been done so far, I don't approve of it. I feel responsible, too. I also reject Mr Rutte's reference to Mr Omtzigt. I have my doubts about the denial and I have my doubts about the defense today, also in view of the pattern that I mentioned earlier today. That is why today, together with my colleague, Mr Hoekstra, I have tabled a motion of censure, which is the most serious objection to the substance. I would also like to ask the informant to consider whether there are possibilities for restoring trust and, if so, which ones. And that's a long way. I would also like to say that it is not self-evident that the VVD leader Rutte will gain confidence and lead in the next phase of the exploration. Madam President, with your permission, I will read out the motion of censure very quickly. [[Motion]] [[The Chamber,]] [[heard the debate,]] [[Whereas, in the light of, inter alia, the case of increases in public confidence and the strengthening of the role of the Chamber as a counterpower to the Government, it is an urgent task;]] [[Whereas the remark \"position Overtzigt, function elsewhere\" in the preparation memo or notes of the former scouts is extremely damaging, as it suggests that a critical member of the Chamber should be removed;]] [[Notes that VVD leader Rutte, who also plays the role of Prime Minister of the mission, did not speak the truth in the media that he did not speak to the former scouts about the position of Mr Omtzigt;]] [[Whereas this process has caused serious damage to the restoration of public confidence in the government and to mutual confidence in the process of establishing a new government;]] [[rejects this practice;]] [[points out that in order to assess whether and, if so, what possibilities exist for the restoration of trust, an informant with the necessary distance from all parties should be expressly included in the mandate,]] [[and goes to the order of the day.]] [[This motion was tabled by Mr Kaag and Mr Hoekstra.]] [[She's getting No. kst-35788-13]]"}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-04-13-eerstekamer-7.u14", "speech text": "Mr. Chairman. On behalf of the D66 Group, I would like to congratulate Mr Hiddema warmly on his swearing in. Mr. Chairman. I want to take you back to 2004. In the First Chamber, as a member of the House of Representatives, I was allowed to defend my own initiative proposal \"Speaking rights for victims and relatives.\" The day before the plenary session, the NVVR published a letter, on 21 April 2004. The judges warned the First Chamber: if the right to speak is introduced, the victim will be given a stand-alone position and then discussions in the courtroom can start. The NVVR thought it better that we didn't hear the victim in court and stated that a written statement would suffice. At the pre-trial stage, the victim was able to talk to the district attorney, and he could report on the victim at the hearing. I won't forget that treatment in the First Chamber. This is where I was put on fire, because why would we endanger order in court? The groups of the CDA, GroenLinks, the Christian Union and the SGP therefore voted against my legislative initiative. They thought a right of speech went too far. The written victim's statement that was then experimented with, they found sufficient. Fortunately, of course, there was a majority in favour. It was a limited right to speak. The victim was only allowed to talk about the impact the crime had had on his life. Even though it was a limited right to speak, it was nevertheless a revolution in criminal law, according to the judges, the Public Prosecutor's Office and the lawyer, because not only the defendant, but also his victim would now be considered as a trial participant at the hearing. Mr. Chairman. We've been 16 years. The legal right to speak has worked out well, meets a need and usually does not disturb the order during the hearing. Over the years, however, it has continued to expand. The victim can now also talk about the burden of proof, the question of proof, the type of punishment and the measure of punishment. In addition, in 2016, the group of spokespersons was expanded. What can it actually be, because the opponents of that time are now defenders of a much wider extension and the advocates of the past voted against this bill. Let me take out two groups. GroenLinks in the Lower House cited Germany's example and said that the victim in the Netherlands should also be able to do a \"Nebenanklage.\" The victim in that German model becomes a surrogate prosecutor who can claim punishment against the defendant. The Minister did not want to go that far, I am happy to say, because that would substantially change our system of criminal proceedings, essentially an indictment by the Public Prosecutor on behalf of society and thus also on behalf of the victim against the defendant. Then the fraction of D66. Sixteen years ago, the House of Representatives was a strong supporter of the extension of victim rights. We felt that the victim should be able to speak for himself about what the defendant might have done to him or her. Why would you leave that to the state's attorney's office or the judge? We thought the victim should do it himself. In those years, we had to overcome a lot of fresh headwinds in order, through initiatives, to strike new picket poles in criminal law and criminal proceedings. Think of the extended application of DNA in criminal law, the right to speak for victims, the lifting of the limitation period in the case of murder, an initiative bill that I, together with Mr Rietkerk of the CDA, brought by the Second and First Chambers and criminalising stalking, of beling. However, in considering this bill in the Lower House, the D66 group as the only group in the Lower House voted against, because the group had reservations about the defendant's obligation to appear, both at the substantive sessions and at the hearing. The group felt that the title of the bill did not really cover the load. The law is called \"Law Enlargement Victim's Rights,\" but the defendant's obligation to appear doesn't have much to do with that, the D66 group found in the Lower House. I'll get back to that in a minute. I believe that Mrs De Boer also said that there are a number of things that are covered in this bill. The first part of the bill anchors the moment of the right to speak at the hearing, namely for the requisition. After that, the judge may, if he so wishes, give the Public Prosecutor's Office and the defence the opportunity to respond to the victim's statement. The judge can then, if necessary, ask some questions. It is therefore possible to deliver tailor-made work at the hearing, but the time of the right to speak is fixed. This is clear to everyone in the Netherlands: after the actual treatment and before the request of the Public Prosecutor's Office. For the sake of clarity, I would like to say that we support this section. This legislative proposal then extends the circle of spokespersons. With the advent of composite families, there are situations where stepparents or foster brothers and sisters also want to use the right to speak, for example if a family member has been murdered. We agree with the government that the circle can be expanded. An amendment was then adopted unanimously which provides for a general measure of governance to be put forward in both chambers, which determines the privacy sensitive data of the victim from the criminal record. The D.A.'s gonna decide what information that is. One can think of the victim's address, phone number and social security number that reported a crime. The Minister has yet to begin the development of such an AMvB. We are curious to see how this self-justified wish can be implemented in practice without problems, delays and red tape for the criminal case. Victims also have an interest in getting justice done quickly in their case. And that might be at odds with cleaning up the criminal record. Can the Minister explain how the advisory bodies responded to the amendment that was adopted? Is it possible to introduce a sensible approach? I have more questions about this section. Suppose the D.A. pulls some of the victim's data from the file because he thinks that the judge doesn't reasonably need these data to reach a decision. Does the defense know that this data was taken out of the file? Does the state's attorney's office have an information obligation on that? What happens if, for example, it appears that the victim's address is relevant in relation to the scene of the crime? Did the district attorney maybe put the defense at a disadvantage by removing the data? Is this contrary to the principles of equality of arms and a fair trial as referred to in Article 6 of the European Convention on Human Rights? Is there any way for the defense to challenge the D.A.'s decision to abandon the data? What happens if the judge considers that data relevant? Will that be sanctioned, such as the inadmissibility of the Public Prosecutor's Office? Or, if that's considered too strict, what possibilities does the judge have to redeploy this? Can the judge order the recording of the data in the file? If so, on what legal basis can the court order this? Mr. Chairman. My group is therefore concerned about the feasibility of this part of the legislative proposal introduced by amendment. I would like to ask the Minister whether he can promise that he will really take the time for the actual preparation of the AMvB, that he will first have an impact analysis done in practice and that he will let the two chambers know how much the cleaning up of the victim data file will cost. Can the Minister also promise that the introduction will not be at the expense of the existing budget throughout the criminal justice chain? We could also consider bringing this part of the legislative proposal into force later."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-04-13-eerstekamer-7.u156", "speech text": "Well, to clarify, and this technical correction can help: they are actually two separate regimes, two separate chapiters. It is already the case that juvenile criminal law applies to juvenile suspects, but this is based on a kind of pedagogical view that it is a good thing that the juvenile suspect is present at the hearing to hear it from the judge and so on. That is independent of these provisions. And there has been a reference that causes confusion, which we would like to get out of again, so we are correcting it in that regard. They're two separate regimes. Finally, on this part. In fact, Mr Otten asked why do you not apply this obligation of appearance more widely, including to suspects who are not attached for the time being? That is also of a practical nature. Experience has shown that in many of these cases the suspects are still in custody, but in cases where this is not the case, it would also be incredibly demanding from all kinds of authorities to force the suspects to be present at the hearing. Then you need to start checking if anyone's willing to come willingly. And if that's not the case, then you have to send all kinds of agencies to track down someone like that and force them to go to court. In other words, that is a lot of hassle and is, in our view, very difficult to implement. Mr. Chairman. I go on to the questions that have been asked about the right to speak. Maybe I could use a little bit of a bridge here, because a discussion about the innocence was also emerging in the case of the right to speak. Mr Rietkerk mentioned it, and there were interruptions by Mr Otten and Mr Van Wely. Mr Rietkerk raised the tension between the right of speech and the presumption of innocence. Of course, the criminal hearing is never a colourless whole. The D.A.'s office will take the charges and run the evidence against which the defendant can defend himself. The right to speak is pinpointed in this bill for the requisition and that happens for a reason. After the requisition, the plea follows and the defense can bring in what it wants against all that has emerged. This is what the victim is all about: the victim and the right to speak may, when exercising the right to speak, highlight his or her experiences and indicate to the court what punishment he believes should be followed. In doing so, he may talk about anything, including the probativeness of the offence, as long as he does not identify or appoint the suspect as the perpetrator. If he goes too far in that, then the judge intervenes, so is my experience. That's the way you guard that innocence charge in the standing practice. A number of members, including Mr Janssen and Mr Recourt, asked: should you not theoretically assume two stages in the criminal proceedings? Then there's a phase where you look at the evidence of the crime, of the crime. Then you make a point, and then you talk about the punishment, where you give the victim more of a role. In theory or academically, I have always found this an interesting model, but at the same time judges seem to be able to get away with it. Previous research has also shown that it may look good in theory, but in practice it does lead to huge bumps. A 2013 study concludes that there are actually no significant benefits to a two-stage model, but that there are significant disadvantages, such as the length of the criminal proceedings, that the structure of the criminal proceedings should be taken entirely and that this ultimately leads to a longer and heavier burden on victims."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-04-13-eerstekamer-7.u188", "speech text": "I admit that, because otherwise, of course, this is not going to work. If you have a right, but you don't know that there's a hearing on which you can practice this, then of course we've all made up a beautiful law that doesn't do so much in practice. That's what I'm saying. Mr. Chairman. Then I come to the third point: the privacy of victims and better protection of contact details. As you know, that is not just a subject in this house, but also on the other side of it for many years, which has received a great deal of political attention. I understand that, too. That's what I hear in my conversations with victims. It sometimes has great impact as address details, phone numbers or things that do not necessarily have to be in the criminal record. That touches that sense of security again. Let me give you a small example. I was in a prison last week. Our staff are also victims of violent crimes or of serious threats. There are all kinds of ways to report this to the address and the name of the employer, but once there are testimonies, it becomes much more complicated. Then you see that these people renounce such a case, because they don't want the bad guys in there who have friends out there to know where they live. They have a wife and children at home who they're worried about. I am only making it very specific, because it is often about this kind of thing and about data in criminal records. Of course, you sometimes need data, for example when it comes to a crime scene or something like that. However, it is interesting that the WODC investigation I believe it came out of 2015 and shows that sometimes there are unnecessarily sensitive data in criminal records that are not necessarily necessary for a proper course of justice. That was the reason for the House of Representatives to table the amendment. This was also the reason for Victim Support The Netherlands to make a point of this: \"Look at this seriously for once. Look not only at the beautiful intentions of all the organisations involved, but also see if you can find a legal basis for them.\" I also immediately indicated that this is a really complicated process. You can hook up with this law, but we haven't solved it yet. I am very aware of the complexity. I fully understand that the implementation of further lower regulation will take a long time. This probably won't be free either. If you're gonna do something like that, it's gonna cost you. I told the House that I do not have this on the current budget and that it cannot be that we are pushing it into the organisations, because they are also with limited capacity. So that really is still an issue. We need to see how we solve that. We all know there's gonna be a new cabinet. Maybe this will come back. Perhaps a little more financial space will be created. I would like to see, underneath that stilt, how we can give more substance to that. The whole process of making such an AMvB starts with mapping policy options and scope and conducting discussions with the implementation organisations. We need to look at what is real and feasible. Eventually, a concept is developed that is also pre-established on both chambers before it is established. We're just gonna stick an orderly and tidy process to that. In that respect, I found the interview this morning in Trouw and the reports about the costs very premature. We're not there yet. We're gonna do it neatly and in a good way in common, with some common sense. We need to be able to work that out together. Mr. Chairman. Mr Dittrich had a very sad question about the implementation practice. Mr Recourt asked about the consultative bodies that we have involved. We're not at that stage yet, but we're all just gonna do it nicely. We are going to make implementation impact analyses and request advice on them. Then we'll come over and see you again, so you can find some of it before we really start working on it. This bill makes a can-determine. As long as there is no AMvB underneath, this has no effect on the implementation practice. In the future, however, it will be possible to fill in this complex problem a little more and to do a little more work on it. The only point is that the D.A. might say this is not our job. We may have some disagreements on that. The Public Prosecutor's Office is, of course, the body that creates the criminal record and therefore has a role to play in ensuring that the documents remain in order and that what should remain confidential remains confidential. So we can't do it without the state's attorney's office, but we're gonna talk to them. Mr. Chairman. Then I have a final block with a number of other themes. There were a number of questions about the submission of declarations, particularly in sex cases. There are exceptions where the declaration is not given. Mrs De Boer, and I also believe Mr Dittrich, asked very strongly about this. This is done in certain cases in the interests of detection and prosecution. This may be the case, for example, if the evidence is almost entirely dependent on the statements made by the victim and the suspect, for example, if things have occurred in the private sphere in particular. The authorities, the police and the Public Prosecutor's Office then say: we want to avoid in an interrogation that the victim bases his experience and memories on the report rather than on his or her own memory of the fact. That's not so much to make it extra complicated for the victim, but because it's important for the evidence and the truth finding. I can imagine that the defendant's defense will use it grif when a PV is given and put to great use in the interrogation, because this also means that the reliability of the interview is at stake. The reason why such a declaration is not given is in the interest of detection and in the interest of truth finding. The only point is that this happens very often now, and also without justification, without further motivation. We have included in this bill that it must be justified in all cases and given to the victim in writing."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-04-13-eerstekamer-7.u197", "speech text": "Yeah, that's right, but that's because it's not in the law right now. Then I would have to go back to the House of Representatives and amend the law accordingly. Then I'd also like to talk to the D.A. and the police first to know what we're pointing at. I don't have the impression that the police and the D.A. are now saying \"we're not going to give you that because we don't believe the victim\" or otherwise. These are bodies that ultimately want people who have committed a sex crime to receive the punishment they have earned. But there's obviously an investigative interest and a risk that if you've filed a report, a record of it and you give it away, eventually a victim becomes more drawn from the police report itself than from his own memories, which doesn't ultimately lead to good truth finding. In fact, that could also make a case vulnerable. The defense will say: well, that's kind of a story; someone indicated that in emotion at the office and now we get that same story again. That could make a case like this vulnerable. In my view, that is the reasoning behind the question of the importance of research. If you ask me to tighten that up, I will first go back to talk to the police and the prosecutor about what that would mean for the implementation practice and how we set up these whole trits and so on. I don't know if that's necessary right now. I think we can look forward, too. This law contains a tightening-up which requires a specific justification. It requires a change of practice. That's what I like to talk about. That's what I'm telling you. It shouldn't be some kind of second automatism. I hope that will really lead to improvement."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-04-14-tweedekamer-12.u77", "speech text": "Oh, yes, correct. They're all public except for company confidential information. I shouldn't even be allowed to share it with you. I understand you're very curious, but then you'll ask me more than I could possibly do. But whatever we can make public, we will make it public to you. And about the deal on Norg, where we cannot do that for certain aspects, we are always prepared to give confidential briefings, as I believe we did with each other in February. Mr. Chairman. Then I come to the issue of a fall in value, which many Members have called attention to. I think Mr Boucke said it nicely in his maiden speech: a house has a financial and economic value, but it must above all be a home. Because of that \"being at home\" many Groningers have also had a very bad time, because you will also have seen in your work visits that it has a huge impact. If you have damage to your home or, more importantly, if you feel that the house your children are walking around in is not safe, then that's very intense. That is an example I saw recently when I visited, but it is true that it also has a financial and economic component. The IMG compensates for all damage caused by loss of value due to gas extraction in the Groningenveld, as you also know of residents whose house has not yet been sold. In the past, there has been a lot of discussion about this and there is also research about the people who made an appointment with the NAM during the period that this was still with the NAM. My predecessor, Eric Wiebes, said about this: I am going to examine, at the request of your Chamber, whether people who made that arrangement with the NAM have been properly dealt with in that context. That was agreed at the time and the investigation is ongoing. Unfortunately, it takes a little longer than I had hoped, but that investigation will come to you before the summer. On that basis, the Chamber should then talk to me or anyone else here about what you would like to do with it, but that is what was promised then, and that is what is just going on. Mr. Chairman. I can tell a bit that all of this is a very poor implementation of that motion. My defense would be that this is what Eric Wiebes promised. I heard some Members of the House say that they want to move in a different direction, but if they want to, I would point out that this is not so simple. It is also not without consequences, including financial. But at least I keep the promise Eric Wiebes made."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-04-14-tweedekamer-5.u14", "speech text": "Yeah, and maybe about the last two motions. I support Mr Wassenberg in this, of course, but my motion goes much further. He just says, \"Everything must be forbidden.\" I would like to draw Mr Wassenberg's attention to that. We must not forget that the animal police have been working on this for a long time. One of the highest police chiefs has played me for months back, but it has once again played again promised to phase everything out. DOD, the fact that I made a work visit has already stopped. So the defense has completely stopped the power collars. I have been there myself with two dog behavior experts from the country: one from the south, one from the west. They've seen that, too. We really went there to check."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-04-15-tweedekamer-14.u184", "speech text": "Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Congratulations to Mrs. Pouw. I just wanted to save my maiden speech. Mr. Chairman. Soon we won't see the coronabos in the Netherlands because of the trees. We are allowed to go to the supermarket and the drugstore, where it is incredibly crowded on weekends, but market merchants are not allowed to sell their non-food items in the outdoors. We can go to the beauty specialist, but not to the solarium. We may be on a full train or tram, but we are not allowed to take a theory exam at the CBR, while the boxes there are made so that it could be done with sufficient distance. As Mr Marijnissen said, we all go to the park in great weather. We are sitting on and in each other and are moderately maintained, but the terraces are not allowed to open, while the catering industry has invested enormously to ensure that all the corona measures can be maintained. I really can't explain to people the Cabinet is working on anymore. Perhaps they will be able to explain it to me on the basis of the examples mentioned here. People's support is falling enormously; we have heard this before today. Good, consistent communication is really essential for this. Then there are the pilot events with the public, for which the cabinet has allocated over 900 million. The letter of 13 April states that the OMT has reservations about this, because this works for people the idea that relaxation is possible when it is actually not. With virologist Marion Koopmans, my question to the Minister is whether we should not spend this money better, for example on extra vaccines, the health bonus, opening up HBO and wo or developing a line of defense, as virologist Koopmans calls it. By this she refers to a plan for how to deal with the threat of new viruses. We cannot allow this to happen again. Much has already been said about the vaccination strategy. We'd bet on age cohorts. If one cohort were finished, the next cohort would begin. The opposite is true, however. When we look at the states of the RIVM, we see that by far not all 90- and 80-plussers have been vaccinated, but that vaccination of the 70- and 60-plussers has already begun. People are confous, they don't understand anymore and they're afraid they're gonna be forgotten. From old to young pricks, as in England, seems a lot more efficient to us. If elderly people are already vaccinated, it is extremely difficult for couples to make an appointment together. Last time, the 50PLUS Group asked for this. The Minister indicated that partner coulance would be applied and that the staff of the GGD would be instructed on this. At a later stage he added the age limit of 75 years. However, we are still getting a lot of distressed reports from people that they still cannot make an appointment together. By the way, a lot of people don't know that age limit's on it. There is also a need for better communication on this issue. Moreover, we believe that couples aged 65 and over should be vaccinated at the same time. According to the GGD, they often come together. This will increase efficiency and reduce travel movements. I would like to hear from the Minister why this is still not settled. Just a few more questions. There's a huge absenteeism in care. The platform Extra hands for care currently has 6,406 people available who can and want to be deployed, and yet only 1,834 people have been introduced to healthcare organisations. Apparently, no match can be found. I'd like to hear from the Minister what it takes to use all these available people anyway. In addition to a health bonus, our healthcare professionals also deserve less work pressure. Paragraph 16 of the letter devotes a great deal to the mental health of young people. That is, of course, entirely justified. I also have children and see what it does to them that they can't go to school, can't work out and have much less social interaction with their friends. But what about the mental health of single elderly people living at home? These people have been at home for over a year, alone or at most with one visitor a day. Over the past covid period, I've spoken to many elderly people who live at home. In the beginning a lot was organized for them. Unfortunately that is already over. Can the Minister tell me about their mental health? And what does that do with their physical health? Why was the welfare and youth support package, to which 40 million goes, worked out in the letter, but I do not see anything about the development of a welfare and elderly support package? Money has also been made available for this. Can the Minister inform me of the state of play? Finally, I have said a great deal about this in my previous position: the current visitor scheme of only one visitor a day. This is extremely burdensome for many people, especially for elderly people living at home with vulnerable health. For example, many older people have been in social isolation for over a year. The Social and Cultural Planning Bureau also points out that it is hard for many people to understand that people meet in field labs in all kinds of places, but the visitor scheme for the elderly is not being adapted, especially since many elderly people have now been vaccinated. With due regard for all the corona measures and in the knowledge that older people have now been vaccinated, I would strongly urge that this be extended by means of a series of measures. Thank you."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-04-15-tweedekamer-6.u2", "speech text": "Thank you, Mr. Chairman. When I asked for this debate a few months ago, there was a lot of topicality on this dossier. In the meantime, these current events have been overtaken by other things. Today I read a newspaper report from the police. Crime has been reduced, but online crime has increased enormously. The subject remains topical. I have a motion that fits in with the debate a few months ago and which I would like to table. [[Motion]] [[The Chamber,]] [[heard the debate,]] [[Whereas the number of organisations and institutions affected by cyber attacks has increased significantly;]] [[noting that data of 35,000 inhabitants of the municipality of Hof van Twente were recently taken from a ransomware attack and that there was no clear scope for action to respond adequately;]] [[Whereas municipalities carry out crucial tasks for their residents and that the temporary non-use of data or loss of data may have an unacceptable impact;]] [[calls on the Government, in cooperation with the VNG and the Information Security Service, to draw up a cyber-defense protocol so that municipalities have a clear framework for action in the case of ransomware, dpos attacks and other disruptive cyber attacks,]] [[and goes to the order of the day.]] [[This motion was tabled by Mr Ye\u015filg\u00f6z-Zegerius.]] [[She's getting No. kst-26643-753]]"}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-04-20-eerstekamer-3.u3", "speech text": "Mr. Chairman. Today we are discussing the proposal to amend the Code of Criminal Law to include a specific grounds for the exclusion of detectives who have used violence in the legitimate exercise of their duties. The task of these investigators is set out in Article 3 of the Police Act. I quote: 'The task of the police is to ensure the effective enforcement of the rule of law and to provide assistance to those who need it in accordance with the law in force'. As my colleague Lilian Helder in the House of Representatives pointed out when dealing with this bill, the word \"task\" implies that a police officer is obliged to act. According to the same Police Act, he or she is permitted to use force. The violence must, of course, be proportionate to the crime in question and there must not be any other possibility of a stand-up or arrest. It is good to bear in mind that where citizens can take a step backwards in certain situations, the task of a police officer is precisely to move away from a threatening situation, to ensure that it de-escalates and avoids the use of violence. Mr. Chairman. This law aims to settle two important issues: the above-mentioned penalty exclusion grounds for investigators and a fact-finding investigation. For the specific grounds for exclusion, a distinction is made between the use of force within the legitimate exercise of the task and the use of violence outside. The new penalty exclusion grounds to be introduced shall apply only to the use of force exercised in accordance with the instructions for violence. Violation of the violence instruction is punishable. A further distinction is made between cases where there is an infringement of the instruction of violence as a result of a culpable error of judgement or carelessness and cases where an investigative officer intentionally violates the instruction of violence. Mr. Chairman. Practice teaches us that in most cases a policeman or woman has to decide in a split second. A violent use can consist of rolling each other down the street or worse, cases where the service gun must be used. In all cases, the violence used will comply with the definition of acts of violence. One can think of abuse or even manslaughter. What is currently happening in practice is that a police officer who uses violence at first instance is regarded as a suspect, even if after the investigation it appears that this policeman or woman is going free because he or she acted according to the instruction of violence, or that he or she acted out of self-defense. The aim of the legislative proposal before us now is to put an end to this situation in the sense that a police officer is no longer directly regarded as a suspect. A good thing, given the special task of the police. To this end, a separate research framework has been included in the legislative proposal. For example, after the use of force which results in serious physical injury or the use of the firearm, an investigation of the facts carried out by the State's Attorney's Office may be initiated at the request of the Public Prosecutor. It seems clear to me that the truth must be at the forefront of this fact-finding. The outcome of the fact-finding will clarify whether the policeman or woman concerned has used the violence according to the instruction of violence. If this is not the case, a criminal investigation will follow in order to determine whether the new proposed Article 372 Code of Criminal Law has been infringed: violation of the instruction or a service requirement, instead of the investigation focusing on serious abuse or manslaughter. A clear distinction is therefore made between the fact-finding and the regular investigation. The investigation of the facts is aimed at investigating whether the violence has been used according to the instruction of violence, the regular investigation is aimed at whether a criminal offence has been committed. The investigation of the facts therefore always precedes a possible criminal investigation, where in the latter case the policeman or woman concerned is only considered a suspect. Again: a good thing. Mr. Chairman. This law is linked to the instruction of the office, so to speak, the internal disciplinary process. It indicates the lower limit which violence is certainly not proportional. As far as I understand it, in principle, any registration of violence ends up with the head of the sector. The Head of Sector shall deliver an opinion on the professionalism of the use of violence. This opinion and the underlying documents then go to the Commission on Violence, which also gives an opinion. On the basis of these opinions, the police chief decides whether the use of violence was professional or not. It looks at both the legality of Article 7 of the Police Act and the instruction of the office as well as at craftsmanship. If, in the opinion of the Chief of Police, there is reason to do so, he shall inform the Prosecutor as soon as possible. The Public Prosecutor then decides whether an investigation of the facts is to be initiated under Article 511a Criminal Procedure. It seems to me that the procedure is sufficiently secure in this way. The cases discussed above may lead to an incident coming into line with criminal law after the investigation of the facts. But also a citizen's declaration can ensure that the prosecutor decides to investigate the facts. Is it true that this fact-finding will then be carried out by the state police, the VIC or by another department not involved in the incident? If so, what are the criteria for choosing one or the other route? I'd like a response from the Minister. Mr. Chairman. I will conclude with three questions to the Minister. Firstly, what happens if an investigative officer uses disproportionate force as a result of a culpable error of assessment by the management echelon? What does this mean for the investigating officer in question, and what are the consequences for the echelon in question? My second question concerns a commitment made to three times by the Minister in the Lower House that the notification form should not serve as evidence in a possible criminal proceedings. How does the Minister intend to honour this commitment? Could the Minister, for example, incorporate the commitment into the instruction? Finally, I would like to know from the Minister whether it is true that investigation of criminal investigations or investigation of facts can be used in the course of instruction. If so, could the Minister specify that? Mr. Chairman. So much for my first term. Thank you."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-04-22-tweedekamer-5.u82", "speech text": "If people are going through that, it's horrible. If as a child you experience that your parent falls away at some point, for whatever reason I have also experienced it in my own life, that is terrible. But we need to be careful here. In this case, if certain skills were to be taken into account in first aid but there are more to be mentioned than would be taught in education and not as a hard obligation to be included in the curriculum, it could not be so, and that is actually what you indirectly say that the education, where the politics is the client, would then be the culprit of. That does not seem to me to be a fair or fruitful way of talking about this issue. Because if so, all swimming lessons must be required immediately. And if you want to do self-defense, you should, so to speak, include that in education, because then everyone, young and old, can use it and it can be applied if they come into a situation where it can be applied. So then you can make a whole list, but I don't think this is the way we should talk about this issue. Let us look at these talks with each other in a good way. How can we also ensure that more young people are confronted with this, including in education? But it's a broader responsibility than education alone."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-04-29-tweedekamer-5.u85", "speech text": "It is 10:30 p.m. and I feel that we are at a crossroads on how this debate continues for the rest of the day. This debate is very much about the culture of governance, how we deal with each other here and how we conduct the debate. What I see happening here is that the VVD Group actually does what has happened more often if there was a problem. You look up a little bit where you can still defend your land and say: we cannot look into the head of the Prime Minister or of members of the cabinet whether it was politically motivated or not. A committee of the Chamber has been set up to investigate. It has said that the Chamber is incomplete, immeasurable and misinformed. That is a conclusion that we have all supported. We supported Mr Dijkhoff's motion on this. We said we share these conclusions. That is what we should just stand back with each other instead of still looking for a defense to talk a little right about what the cabinet has done? In any case, that is how my group sees it. I think that's wrong."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-04-29-tweedekamer-5.u782", "speech text": "Thank you, Mr. Chairman. There are three points I would like to address. The first concerns my comments in the minutes of 12 July 2019. A number of people have asked for this. The second concerns a number of aspects of implementation. Mr Segers, Mrs Ploumen and Mrs Marijnissen in particular asked for this. Finally, the debate on precedent, which has also been called for. The first point concerns the minutes of 19 July 2019. I'd like to put a few things first before I come to that. The Lower House played an important role in identifying the problems of many parents with the childcare allowance. Your Chamber has rightly been close to the cabinet and has called for action. It has indeed emerged, addressed and taken up as a result of these questions to the cabinet. That is the merit of your Chamber. There is a great deal of emphasis on the role of the Chamber as an auditor of the cabinet and rightly so. This is also the role that has been important here in bringing out this great disgrace that has taken place in recent years for these parents, who have been in great trouble with this. I also say, like the Prime Minister and Minister Hoekstra, that the Chamber is also a co-legislator and client. The Second Chamber and the Cabinet are thus in a kind of permanent interaction as power and counterpower. That's part of our job, too. In my role as Minister, I have always sought the broadest possible support for my policy. I have often spoken with the political groups to form the coalition, but also very often with groups outside the coalition, for example when it comes to the pension agreement or the Corona support packages. Then you do make agreements with each other to get support in advance. Not always with Mr De Jong, but he is often a little more critical of my policy and that is allowed. I'm trying to get support in your Chamber for measures I want to take, for policies. Mr Jetten asked me: why did you say the things you said at the Council of Ministers on 12 July? Was it powerless, was it frustration, was it supposed to shut people up? I'd like to say something about that. Those minutes indeed show that I was frustrated at the time. This has to do with the debate of 4 July 2019. I thought Mrs Marijnissen referred to that as well. I had the feeling, after that debate on 4 July, in which the Secretary of State had indeed apologized, a number of compensation schemes had been announced and a number of policy changes on professional recovery had been announced, that we could finally work on solutions, solutions for those parents. That was after a month, which I experienced very intensively with the Secretary of State, in which we were really looking for ways of achieving such compensation. Just after that debate on 4 July, in the week after that debate, bad news suddenly came out again about the surcharge affair. That was a new disclosure at RTL News about another CAF case, CAF 16. My fear, but also the disappointment, was that this new revelation and also the reaction of Members of Parliament would lead to the solutions being withdrawn, that it would indeed be a kind of struggle. You can also see in the Minutes that I am actually saying: I am afraid that the solution will be further away. So that is really a frustration for me personally at that time and I needed to blow off steam in the Council of Ministers with my colleagues. I also think that that should be possible. 'Cause you're with each other, in confidence. Then you say, \"This is what I think.\" That was my emotion at the time and you can read that in the minutes. That doesn't look good at all. I'll admit that immediately to Mr Jetten, but that's the emotion I have at the time. And that emotion is a little wider. You can read that in those minutes. I also had a debate with your Chamber on problems at the UWV that week. There are indeed a lot of problems from the years 2014 and 2015, due to cuts and due to a very large organisation. That was about the export of WW benefits. I have also had a lively debate with your Chamber on this. Actually, I was frustrated those months about how so many problems came to light in the implementation. We had talked about this a number of times in the cabinet, about how we really had to do something with it as a cabinet. We really need to invest in this, and we really need to get to work on it, otherwise we will continue to create problems for citizens here, but we will continue to pursue incidents. That was my frustration. That was my explanation. I have also said in those minutes that you can read that it is not about persons: it is not about Mrs Leijten, it is not about Mr Omtzigt, it is not about Mrs Lodders and it is not about Mr Wiersma. I also said: I also recognize it with MPs from other coalition parties, that you see some kind of reaction to reaction. And there was my frustration. It was, and I want to stress this, in no way my aim to oppose MPs. Nor was it in any way my aim to limit MPs in asking critical questions. Absolutely not. I have also been a member of your Chamber for seven and a half years. I also attach great importance to the role that you, as a Member of Parliament, can ask the cabinet any questions you wish to ask and that you also receive an answer. What was it about me? I was concerned that as a cabinet and chamber as co-legislator and as an executive and sponsor of the policy we could work together on solutions. My feeling at the time was that that was not the case. Again, does that look nice? No. Are those remarks of frustration? Yes. But they were meant, for my defense, for a small group of people with whom I worked very intensively and who meet every Friday in that room here at the Binnenhof. As I said, this took place in a broader context. It was indeed about the execution. In spring 2019, this implementation was under great pressure. We did indeed have problems with the Tax Office, at the UWV, at the CBR and for example at DUO. A lot of different government implementation organisations were lagging behind in ICT and in services to people. That's what I was worried about. You can also read in the minutes of 14 June that I am concerned about that. You can read that I actually want a kind of deltaplan approach in the Cabinet to get to work on this, because I fear that more of these things will emerge, where people are indeed at risk of falling between shore and ship due to problems in implementation. That's why we started work on Implementation in June 2019. A great deal has happened there. There is an approach, more customization is made possible, for example for professionals in the execution, so that they can also deliver customization to customers and to citizens, and implementation becomes more involved in policy making, so that we can adjust sooner if it goes wrong in the execution. A few questions have also been asked about this. Mr Klaver asked: if mistakes are made in implementation, can the government be honest about that? I very much agree with Mr Klaver. For example, I myself try to inform your Chamber twice a year about the state of execution of two large implementation organisations under my responsibility, UWV and SVB. Then I ask UWV and SVB to create bottlenecks that have emerged in the execution. I am therefore asking for signals that come into the helpdesk, so signals that come out in the execution where people actually get caught up. That way, I can also forward it to your room, so we can work together to solve those things. We have also announced in the cabinet's response to the POK-KOT a number of such initiatives, such as civil panels and the Garage, of the SVB's example, precisely in order to hear more quickly from citizens what they are up against in the implementation. Mrs Marijnissen, but also Mrs Ploumen and Mr Segers asked where else this is going. Are there any other examples in the implementation that people run into? I'm afraid so. There are potentially harsh aspects in the laws and regulations that we all want to get rid of. On 12 February this year, we informed the House of Representatives by letter about the follow-up to the Omtzigt motion, which was submitted to the debate on the POK-KOT, about an investigation into the harsh effects in the law and regulations of the Participation Act, the UWV and employee insurance and also the personal budget. In addition, at the moment, together with the municipalities, I am looking at hardnesses in the Participation Act. We've had some round tables. This is indeed the example of Mr Segers that someone is shopping for someone on welfare benefits who gets a fine for that. Is that what we want to do with each other? That's such an example. But the fraud law has also been dealt with very often here. How's it working out? That is the distinction between a deliberate fraud operation and a small mistake that you have made but which may have major consequences for, for example, that benefit. That's the kind of thing we're mapping out. Before the summer recess, we would like to inform your Chamber of its progress. We want to map out where those hardnesses, those hardnesses in the execution are currently based on the signals from UWV, municipalities, SVB, DUO and that kind of large government organizations. This is also a follow-up to the Ploumen/Jetten motion submitted to the POK-KOT. Madam President. The third point is that of the precedent. Mrs Marijnissen asked for that. You can also see this in the minutes of the Council of Ministers of, I believe, 7 June 2019, which I am indeed speaking about, partly on behalf of the Secretary of State Van Ark, who is not in the Council of Ministers at the time. I need to say a few things about that. The Secretary of State for Finance indicated in that Council of Ministers that he was looking for ways to accommodate the affected parents in the CAF 11. It was then really a search by the Secretary of State for compensation to be made very quickly. But that was incredibly complicated in terms of legislation and regulation, in terms of the definition of all kinds of complex legal definitions, which could not be covered by legislation either. You could see that later on in the Donner Committee, but that was also happening back then. For example, what was unclear was the following: the Prime Minister also said it in his first term. By default, you can go back five years in time for compensation. We cannot go back, because the laws and regulations are based on a maximum of five years ago. This also has to do with legal certainty. You have to be able to assume that at some point things are fixed. If you are then confronted with parents who have been duped in the period 2012-2014/2015, that means that you do not reach a group. We found that indigestible at the time. We were looking, especially the Secretary of State for Finance, for a way to shape that compensation. One important point is that we could not see all the consequences. Consequences such as: what does it mean for the execution; how many people are involved; how far back do we go; what does it mean for other supplements, for example for the rental allowance and for the care allowance? Can we see that and can we do that? We can announce something, but if we can't do it, we promise a dead sparrow. Those were all legitimate questions. A specific point that played the Whitsuntide weekend on that weekend after that Council of Ministers on 7 June was a way of compensating parents by means of a settlement agreement. There was a lot of criticism about that, even later. It was a way to see if we could give anything of compensation. But with a settlement agreement, the risk is that you don't have an objection and appeal. That too is such a dilemma. It may be possible for compensation and you can make up for it very quickly, but you do have all kinds of dilemmas in objection and appeal, which can cause people to get hurt. There are not only material effects, there is not only material damage from this affair, but there is also intangible damage. Later, at the Donner Committee, this was implemented and later Secretary of State Van Huffelen gave further details. But those were all dilemmas that weekend or actually that month. At the beginning of June, Secretary of State Snel quickly came out of the tunnel. We really spent a month looking for a solution to the problem of compensation. That is what I wanted to say, as an explanation of my comment on precedent. Mrs Marijnissen just referred to precedent in the o/gs memo, so the memo on intent/great debt. My comment is only about 7 June in the Council of Ministers. This was about the weekend in which a quick compensation scheme was sought for the parents from the CAF 11 case. Finally, Mr President. I'm rounding up. It has rightly been charged to the Cabinet that there has been too little and too late in the childcare allowance affair. The seriousness is too late and let me say it loudly. The cabinet has also simply failed. That is what I am charging myself for, because as a Minister for Social Affairs, I myself have a responsibility in the childcare allowance to raise this point more quickly. In response to your question, I have tried to outline my commitment and commitment, including during that period, and my considerations that have played a role in this. I also tried to outline a bit of my frustration that also played at the time, because we were all looking for a solution and felt that we were always chasing the facts. On June 4th we thought \"we're coming for the wave; we're finally going to work on a solution\" and a few days later that image was completely destroyed. Then I thought... Well, I'm not gonna say it, because that's really bad. But the minutes say what I thought about that moment. Thank you."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-05-11-tweedekamer-29.u418", "speech text": "Then the movement-Kops in part No. 25. I have the impression that he has submitted it many times already, about the reversal of the climbing measures. You know this isn't the line of this cabinet, so I have to dissuade it. The same applies to the motion in part No. 26 to run it through the shredder. Mr. Chairman. Then the motion to part No. 27. I have already said that we are already looking at these emissions in the biomass harvest, but I think you really mean that we are going to do an additional measurement here in the Netherlands. In the debate I have already said that I do not intend to do so, because according to the cabinet you count double, so I must advise against that motion. Then the motion to part No. 28 by Mr Van Raan. I think he's saying, \"Make sure you don't have any road leaks.\" That's actually the purpose of his motion. You would, apart from the fact that it's a little complicated to purchase these GIs for your import, because that's what you end up doing as an individual user... You know how this system works. That doesn't mean anything about which current is actually coming through the line. That's why I don't recommend the motion. But we'll do everything we can to prevent that road leak. In my opinion, Mr Van der Lee also pointed out earlier in response to the VVD: we should also take some hope of what is happening around us. In that sense, the risk may be reduced. Mr. Chairman. Then the motion to part No. 29. I think that's a very complicated one. We are now preparing for our defense in the lawsuit that is running against us. The cabinet clearly believes, as has already been said in previous cases, that this is a proper way of doing things. It gets a little complicated when I start sharing everything we have there again. Of course, we're doing everything we can to settle this lawsuit in our favor. I also find it a little complicated what Mr Van Raan is trying to do with this motion if we were to do something else with it. I would therefore advise against the motion. We are simply of the opinion that the Chamber, too, has passed the law that the Coal Ban Act has been properly implemented. That's why I have to discourage the motion. Mr. Chairman. Then the motion to part No. 30, which says: exclude biomass from future subsidies. I'm gonna have to advise against that motion. Grants for electricity are no longer issued. Furthermore, this month I will come back to the previous motion on how we deal with biomass in low temperature heat. Then the motion to part No. 31 by Mr Van der Lee. This requires a slightly more comprehensive, also legal-technical, answer, which I would like to put on paper once again, because it concerns the whole point of this ex-post approach. I have also checked with us very carefully. I have already indicated that there may also be meteorological disadvantages. There will also be a legal component. The ECHR requires us to have ex ante parameters for the loss compensation, otherwise the bill would be unlawful. That's kind of a long and complicated story. Let me see if I can get that in your direction before the vote. Is that okay with you? I can totally read what's written here, but it's quite a technical story that turns out to be: dissuade. According to our best lawyers, too, we would go against the ECHR differently. That is not something we want as a cabinet, can and may."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-05-18-eerstekamer-5.u3", "speech text": "Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Exceptional times call for exceptional measures. With that insight, we have all been enriched over the last year and a half. At least you hope so. The own resources decision is an example of the exceptional actions decided upon by the European Union. My group welcomes that. As far as my group is concerned, this debate should have taken place much earlier. On 30 March, the Finance Committee issued its final report. It's only after a month and a half we're here. Why? Because the opposition VVD party in this Chamber thought it was the task of Mr Rutte and Mr Hoekstra to assist in the negotiations, and then to surrender to the German Constitutional Court, which had no problem in this proposal. The negotiations on the Multiannual Financial Framework and the Recovery Fund had apparently not done enough damage and therefore the Netherlands had to be one of the last countries to deal with this bill. My group deeply regrets this state of affairs. After more than two years of positioning, forging coalitions as the dirty four and putting the heels in the sand, the Dutch government finally had to accept a lot of what was at odds with her commitment. Let me be clear: we are not grieved about it. I will come back to the point of the result in relation to the Dutch commitment. However, it is clear that the position of the Netherlands in Europe has deteriorated considerably. Mr. Chairman. Many technical questions, suggestions and consequences of agreements on the Eigenmiddelsbericht for the Netherlands have been discussed in detail in the Dutch Parliament. That is why I shall confine myself here on behalf of my group to a number of key points. First of all, the result versus bet. My esteemed fellow party member Bart Snels across the street indicated in the debate with this minister that he had to sneak around when reading the explanatory statement, in which the government claims that the result is in line with the government's commitment and she also uses concealing language to say that the government has had to accept a lot. Apparently, I have a different kind of humor than my colleague, because I couldn't laugh about it at all. Also in the light of the discussions on a new administrative and political culture, it is vital that the rulers tell the whole, honest story and that they do not try to justify everything that is crooked, so that it fits into their little street. I would just like to remind you of the proposal from Austria, Sweden, Denmark and the Netherlands: a temporary one-off emergency fund. Heavyly affected EU countries can borrow up to two years to overcome the corona crisis. That was the bet. The government's commitment was therefore a small, temporary, loan-based recovery fund. It has become a largely gift-based fund of 750 billion, including 390 billion donations. In doing so, the Vice-President of the Commission, Dombrovskis, recently stated that conversion into a definitive recovery instrument is not excluded. The commitment of the Dutch government was also: no joint loans on the capital market, the detestable Eurobonds. Exactly that's gonna happen. For EUR 750 billion, the European Commission may borrow up to 2058. The minister will hopefully see the end, but I probably won't. It was interesting to see how the minister tried to bring European agreements into line with the government's commitment in the Lower House. \"Ah, borrowing by the Commission on the capital market is not new and not unique; it has happened before,\" said the Minister. But old or new, that's irrelevant. The government has done everything it can to stop that. No gifts, but only loans, well, that related to the MFF and not to a new recovery fund, the Minister claimed. Besides, not to mention, this Recovery Fund comes from the heart of the Heads of Government. So the minister wasn't involved? Mr. Chairman. I invite the Minister today to come up with an honest reflection, with a better story than his defense in the House of Representatives. I would also ask him to refrain from the historic choice of presenting the Recovery Fund, which allows a huge future-oriented investment, as'money in exchange for reform'. My group attaches great importance to an honest reflection. For European cooperation to be supported, especially in difficult times, it is important that this is done properly, especially when future generations will have to deal with the consequences of these decisions. Mr. Chairman. With this own resources decision, we are making it possible to respond to a deep crisis at European level. Member States are financing recovery without further pushing them down the drain, as in the euro crisis, by cutting them down. It is historic, because we tackle this crisis together, allocate this green so that the corona crisis does not result in a deeper climate crisis or recession, which is many times more expensive than the Recovery Fund itself. As far as we are concerned, the economic stimulus could have been even greater, especially in comparison with the United States, which has a much larger support package for significantly fewer inhabitants. How does the Minister view, when the crisis lasts longer than the Minister could have imagined at the beginning of 2020 and the economy in the European Union recovers more slowly than in the US, against the size of this fund? Joint recovery requires a joint solution, which must consist of green investment and reforms. The recommendations from the European Union to the Netherlands are well-ready and have been known for many years: reduce private debt; accelerate mortgage interest; restore the housing market by strengthening and making the housing sector more accessible; stimulate citizens' wage growth in cooperation with the social partners; make the pension more transparent, intergenerational and more shock-proof and do more against an aggressive fiscal climate. It's all clear. The minister said money in exchange for reform. That's the heart of the Recovery Fund, according to him. Will it finally work for the Netherlands? What reforms is the Dutch Government planning? The Netherlands is also entitled to 5.6 billion. Is it true that the Netherlands has already informally discussed a number of plans with the European Commission and that these plans have been rejected because the necessary reforms were missing? In other words, where are we with the plans for the Recovery Fund? The Netherlands is apparently the only country that has not yet submitted plans to the Commission, arguing that the Netherlands is waiting for formation. We are very concerned about this. It is about forward-looking investments in digitalisation and in a sustainable green recovery. The Netherlands cannot start this early enough. Where's the sense of urgency? How much progress has the Netherlands made with the preparations since the treatment in the Lower House in March? The delay may not have an impact on the amount that the Netherlands allows, but it does have an impact on time. We call on the government to speed up the plans, by means of an inclusive process in which the House of Representatives is strongly involved, so that we can submit a broad-based plan more quickly in Brussels. Unusual times require unusual actions. I'd like to get a response from the Minister. Mr. Chairman. The fundamental point of the rule of law mechanism, in which the Commission can shorten countries such as Poland and Hungary from the budget and from the Recovery Fund. Unfortunately, the European Union cannot intervene if Poland and Hungary continue to politicise their judiciary without linking it to EU funds. We would have liked to see that different. We would also have preferred the Commission not to wait for the European Court to rule before this EU legislation is enforced. It's a dangerous precedent. We assume that the government agrees with this. What is the Netherlands doing about the Prime Minister's idea that we should think about future budgets without Poland and Hungary? I would like to know a little bit more about that. Hungary's first recovery plan submitted directly affected violations of the rule of law with regard to less university and academic freedom. The Hungarian Government's modified version also gave little hope. Thanks to the Netherlands, Member States have control over all plans submitted through a delegated act. In the case of a majority, objections may be raised. Is the Netherlands prepared to carry out a specific assessment of compatibility with the rule of law within the national recovery plans and to refer this to the European Commission? My group is considering a motion on this point. Mr President, I will conclude. For GroenLinks, it is clear: this proposal is an important milestone for Europe. Hopefully it'll get a sequel. Let us invest our green and honest out of this crisis, paying close attention to the fundamental principles of the rule of law, so that we can continue to flourish our continent. You retreat behind the dike and do nothing but slow down, after all, is many times more harmful to everything and everyone."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-05-19-tweedekamer-8.u4", "speech text": "Thank you, Mr President. I am starting this debate by considering the worrying situation in the Palestinian territories and Israel. I will then discuss the climate crisis, which will be discussed at the European summit. Once again, they are citizens, both on the Palestinian side and on the Israeli side, who have been victims of a violent escalation. The Animal Party therefore strongly condemns the violence of both the Israeli authorities and the armed Palestinian groups. In the midst of this violence, we must not forget that the escalation is the result of decades of oppression, occupation and systematic violation of international law by the Israeli authorities. Generation after generation, Palestinians are subjected to structural inequality. This complex conflict can only be resolved if we also bear in mind the causes. The Animal Party therefore insists that in future the Prime Minister refrains from sending out unilateral tweets in which he refers only to Israel's right to self-defense. In his letter, Minister Blok is a bit more nuanced by recognising that Israeli settlement policy is hindering the peace process. My question to the Prime Minister is how he explains this inconsistent communication. In line with the conclusion of the letter, I ask the Prime Minister the following questions. Is he prepared, in accordance with the Karabulut motion adopted, to draw up a concrete roadmap with measures as Israel continues its occupation policy? And is he prepared to plead with his colleagues at the European summit to do the same? Mr. Chairman. Then there's the climate crisis. Two weeks ago, on Earth Day, UN Secretary-General Ant\u00f3nio Guterres stated that climate change is at the edge of the abyss. The only safe step you can take at the edge of the abyss is a step back. So far, I have only heard the Prime Minister of our country, who is largely below sea level, express concern about a possible coalition agreement that should not contain too much climate. The Netherlands has now become the disgrace of Europe in terms of climate. We're dangling at the bottom of lists, like the one about the share of renewable energy, we're Europe's champion deforestation and we're getting caught up on all sides when it comes to our climate goals. Most recently by Germany, which is going to raise the target by 2030 to 65%. But Finland, Denmark and Austria also have significantly higher climate targets. The fact that the Netherlands does not join the leaders is going to avenge itself, because because of everything we do not do now, we are saddled with enormous costs and a distorted climate in the coming generations. The Animal Party wonders how a Dutch Prime Minister can still be credible in promoting an ambitious European climate policy if the Netherlands itself refuses to join in action with Europe's leaders. How will the Prime Minister ensure that the Netherlands join the European countries that are climate leaders? Mr. Chairman. In addition, the Animal Party sends a clear message to the European Summit: stop European policies that exacerbate the climate crisis. Stop concluding trade agreements which contribute to deforestation and pollution. Stop subsidising intensive livestock farming, which emits greenhouse gases, damages our nature and contributes to deforestation in the rest of the world. In addition, the UN Environment Organisation warns that the risk of over-exploitation of animal diseases to humans is increased by large-scale and intensive livestock farming. The transition to regional, more plant-based agriculture has become all the more urgent in the context of green recovery after the corona crisis. So my message is stop throwing oil on the fire. Finally, Mr President. After the Brexit, the United Kingdom announced a bill banning exports of live animals for slaughter and fattening. The EU Member States can now do nothing to put an end to this, because they are hampered by European regulations. For years there have been great dramas with long-distance animal transports: trucks that tilt and ships that capseize, with thousands of animals drowning. The EU remains behind and does not want to look for a change in the rules until two years from now. If the United Kingdom can arrange it so quickly, so can Europe, one would think. Is the Prime Minister prepared to commit to a European ban on the export of live animals? Thank you."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-05-19-tweedekamer-8.u12", "speech text": "Mr. Chairman. Thank you. I would like to congratulate Mr Eppink on his maiden speech. I should like to wish those colleagues who are about to make a maiden speech very much success. I will listen with particular interest. Mr. Chairman. Today we are talking about the contribution of the Netherlands to the EU Summit. It is not on the agenda, but I cannot escape the impression that our Prime Minister is talking about it today and also tomorrow at the EU Summit. Mr. Chairman. It will happen to you: to be born in a country where life has not been given you as a child, to grow up among collapsed buildings, to learn to play with the residual waste of state-of-the-art weapons, to learn how to deal with grief, pain and frustration of your parents, to realize that only your identity is enough to be caught preventively, to end up in prison without charge or trial, without having an idea of what you're being tried for, looking at the sky every moment, waiting for bombs, searching every morning in the rubble for your nephews and nieces that you might still be able to save and grow up with devastations and bombs, posttraumatic disorders and wounds. Even the month of contemplation and rest for Muslims is not given you; you must pass the Ramadan with weapons aimed at you. It sounds like a nightmare, but this is the reality for many Palestinian children. This was the reality of the 60 Palestinian children killed in recent days by Israeli violence. This is the reality of 260 Palestinian children in Israeli prisons. This is the reality of 1 million children trapped in Gaza without hope and hope, in the largest open-air prison in the world. Mr. Chairman. It is our job as a parliament not to look away and not to make excuses, but to say what it stands for. We are in favour of justice. We're for peace. We're against oppression. We're against occupation. We're against apartheid, aren't we? In fact, you could expect the Netherlands and the Dutch Government to promote the international legal order, because it is in our Constitution, and Israel to be severely condemned and sanctions imposed. Nothing could be further from the truth. Even if it turns out that Israel has no right to stand up and that civilians are killed consciously and purposefully and children are taken from their lives, our Prime Minister is still talking about the 'right to self-defense'. That's a deep, deep shame. In the meantime, he has had thousands of e-mails about this, in which people say that Rutte does not speak on their behalf; and, President, certainly not on behalf of DENK. Mr. Chairman. Israel is guilty of human rights violations. Israel continues to occupy Palestinian territory and to steal Palestinian land to build illegal settlements there. Israel is guilty of apartheid. Mr President, my question is simple: does the Prime Minister actually recognise that? Israel has for years been violating essential articles of the UN Charter and the Geneva Convention. I'm not just saying this. This is what guardians of international law say, from the WarChild organization to the United Nations. This is what organisations like Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch and also the Israeli human rights organisation B'Tselem say. The Palestinian human rights organisations are talking about systematic violations of human rights by Israel. How dare the Prime Minister talk about the right to self-defense and proportionality if it is Israel that is fooling around with international law? I'd like to get the Prime Minister's vision on this. Mr. Chairman. Is it proportional to annexing the Westbank and throwing Palestinians out of homes, because it's just possible? Gladly the Prime Minister's vision! Is it proportionate to bomb the media building in Gaza, without any threat? I'd like to hear a response from the Prime Minister. How does the Prime Minister think a solution to this conflict can be achieved if part of the population is oppressed by a regime of apartheid? What is worth the life of a Palestinian child whose rights are violated from all sides, if we join the war criminal Netanyahu? Gladly the Prime Minister's vision! Mr. Chairman. The day before yesterday the news came out that Israel is planning to blow up two schools, Al-Buraq and Al-Aqsa, which function as shelters. Every time there's the same excuse: there might be terrorists hiding. Stop that! Get rid of that right to self-defense! Finish that. Mr. Chairman. This is the toughest state terror I've ever seen. The only one who deserves this is Netanyahu, who is in a difficult political situation, because four elections have been held in the last two years and he does not succeed in forming a government. Let us follow the example of Spain, which in 2010 made Netanyahu liable for war crimes, for crimes against humanity. When do we stop our cowardice? When are we really going to protect human rights and the international legal order? Thank you, Mr. Chairman."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-05-19-tweedekamer-8.u16", "speech text": "I also look at the root causes and then I see that Hamas does not recognise Israel's right to exist and that Hamas is a legitimate target for any Jew anywhere in the world. That's one of the root causes. It is about Israel's right to exist. It would be a credit to Mr Kuzu if the suffering were appointed on both sides. I honestly don't understand. 3,000 missiles are fired at villages and cities at random, with the aim of hitting as many people as possible. If there was no self-defense of Israel, the Prime Minister also spoke of \"legitimate self-defense\". Then there was much more horrible injustice. What stopped that? That was done by legitimate self-defense. But that is what Mr Kuzu is attacking the Prime Minister. So 3,000 missiles can be fired, but if you arm yourself against it with an Iron Dome shooting those missiles out of the sky, you can get Mr Kuzu's wrath on you. I really don't understand how you can look at this conflict balanced by talking about ten minutes of all Israel's crimes, but ending up again in a litany against Israel when I ask a question about 3,000 missiles being fired. The right to self-defense is so disgruntled with Israel. I do not understand how Mr Kuzu cannot look at all people as people of flesh and blood who are entitled to peace and security."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-05-19-tweedekamer-8.u40", "speech text": "Thank you, Mr. Chairman. \"If the Arabs lay down their weapons, there will be no more war. If Israel lays down his weapons, there will be no more Israel.\" This winged statement touches the core of the problem: the shared anti-Semitic hatred among Muslims, who do not tolerate the Jewish state and have the desire to destroy Israel. That is the poisonous cocktail that we see everywhere, not only in the Gaza Strip or in Tehran, but also in our own country. This hatred is the fuel behind the thousands of rockets, I told you: there are over 9,700 people who have been fired from Gaza on civilian targets in Israel. They have been fired by terrorists who must be severely condemned by all of us, just as Israel's right of self-defense should naturally be supported and supported by Parliament. But what do we see here? The arrows are mainly directed at Israel by the left, just like the rockets. Not Hamas and Islamic Jihad are under a magnifying glass, but Israel must be investigated and condemned according to the leftist cabal. That is to get nauseous, just like the images of the pro-Palestine demonstrations in the Netherlands. These are meetings where the hatred of Israel and the Jews sprang from, where \"Allahoe akbar\" and \"Heil Hitler\" were called, which was here on the Malie field, and where the message was proclaimed that Israel should be replaced by a caliphate. What a caliphate means, ISIS taught us. Mr. Chairman. Demonstrations against the corona policy on the Malieveld were broken up, but these demonstrations were apparently allowed by our government. That's incomprehensible and cowardly. That is unworthy of the Netherlands, I say in the direction of the Prime Minister. This also applies to the reaction of the cabinet, because it takes verbatim distance from the demonstrations, but does that absolve a little too literally. Because last weekend the hordes of anti-Semites were able to pave their way freely through the cities. And that's got to be different, Mr. Chairman. The PVV wants to know what the Prime Minister is going to do to cut off new anti-Semitic demonstrations that call for violence, and they will undoubtedly come to an end immediately. Has the Prime Minister, for example, already had contact with the mayors of the major cities about this phenomenon? Is there going to be an instruction to intervene immediately if those anti-Semitic slogans are echoing through our cities again? In short, will there be any measures, or will the government stand idly by? Mr. Chairman. Could it be that the Prime Minister is afraid to intervene because he still wants to do business with left-wing pro-Palestinian parties such as GroenLinks, the SP and D66? It was very striking that the Prime Minister changed his tone about Israel after the pressure from the left. From support for Israel, the Prime Minister, following that criticism from the left, turned to a softer statement in which the terror groups Hamas and Islamic Jihad were suddenly silenced. However, Israel was taught a lesson from the Tower, namely that it has to act proportionally. A misplaced message from the Prime Minister, because there is no army in the world that is as precise and proportional as that of Israel, at least much better at that point than what the Netherlands has done. The Netherlands did not send any warning text messages, nor did any pawnowners call before bombing terror targets in Iraq. Mr. Chairman. Where war is waged, death falls. Unfortunately, civilian deaths, too. In this case Hamas and its associates are responsible for this. Hamas places rockets and fires them from between their own women and children. Hamas is hiding under or behind journalists, so Israel quite rightly destroys a large tower in Gaza where, in addition to Hamas' offices and his intelligence services, there were also press offices. There they were, in front of the ruins, the journalists who did not want to see or indeed did not see Hamas' presence, which is also part of the problem. After all, they like to film in hospitals, but never from terror tunnels, missile storage sites or below Hamas offices. What we obviously do not want to see is the bad role played by states such as Turkey, Qatar and Iran, countries that support Hamas and Islamic Jihad terrorists. They don't just do that verbally. Why isn't this getting any attention? Last year, for example, Turkey gave shelter to a dozen Hamas leaders and a passport, a Turkish passport. I would like to know what action is being taken on this matter from the Prime Minister. Has Turkey actually been confronted with these facts? More importantly, how will these terrorists be prevented from ever travelling to the Netherlands with their Turkish passport? I'd like a response from the Prime Minister. I appeal to the Prime Minister, I must say to the Netherlands, not to interfere in the process of claiming Jewish Israeli houses they owned a long time ago. That case is still pending before the Israeli Supreme Court. Then let that court decide and don't interfere. Nor do we tolerate foreign interference in our legal proceedings, so do not do so in the other way. Finally, Mr President. The PVV believes that the Netherlands as an independent country, regardless of what the UN or the EU wants or does not want, should have the backs against terror. The Netherlands must stand by Israel in word and gesture. I therefore call on the Prime Minister to stop all support for Palestinian organisations. The money that we can save this year can be offered to Israel for the purchase and production of \"Iron Dome\" rockets. Let us make it clear in words and gestures that we support Israel's right to self-defense and that the Islamic anti-Semitic policy of hatred and terror must never win. Thank you, Mr. Chairman."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-05-19-tweedekamer-8.u46", "speech text": "I do not think Mr Van der Lee is aware of my point, because I believe Hamas has the best defence weapon. Best defense weapon. Let me explain to you why that is. If Hamas just doesn't shoot missiles at Israel, then Hamas isn't attacked by Israel either. It's the best you can do: you don't do anything yourself and the other side doesn't do anything either, done. Does Mr Van der Lee agree with me?"}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-05-19-tweedekamer-8.u52", "speech text": "Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Others have already mentioned the numbers, but I would like to repeat them. Not only now more than 200 victims on the Palestinian side, including, I believe, 63 children, but also 12 on the Israeli side. Every victim is one too many. But this too is a pattern. Over the past 13 years, we have seen that there are over 20 on the Palestinian side of every regrettable death on the Israeli side. Apart from the difference in fighting power, economic and political power, these figures express how asymmetric this conflict is. No matter how you judge the conflict, it is clear that Israel is the strongest and superior party. This new explosion of violence could thus have been prevented if the Israeli Government had been forced by much more international pressure to stop its perverse colonial policy. The continuing combination of annexations, expropriation and excessive police action, combined with systematic discrimination against Arabs within Israel itself, is not addressed as a root cause, too little by the Netherlands, the European Union and the international community. The leadership of the Palestinian Authority and Hamas also have more regard for their own position than they do to serve the interests of the Palestinian people. That does not alter the fact that there is not only a right to self-defense. The fact that the Prime Minister explicitly emphasised this in his tweet, but did not mention that Palestinians also have the right, within the limits of international law and proportionality, to oppose colonial repression and expropriation, is a huge blunder. As well as he should have condemned the offensive bombings that took place in Gaza from Israel. My question is, how did that tweet come about? Did the government even speak with one voice here? Because a day later, I saw a tweet by the Minister for Foreign Trade and Development Cooperation, Mrs Kaag. She said that our Constitution calls for all violations of international law to be appointed and countered and that this does not include selectivity. In a statement on Sunday, the Minister is trying to restore balance. Doesn't he regret that tweet? What I then ask of the Dutch Government are further efforts to get that ceasefire off the ground as soon as possible. With Mr Sjoerdsma, I deplore the attitude of Hungary, which has blocked a strong statement of Europe. This is another proof that we must get rid of the veto in European foreign policy, otherwise we will again be powerless, even in this type of conflict. Does the Prime Minister agree with me on that point? In addition, I hope that the Prime Minister will be prepared to state at the European summit tomorrow that the Netherlands wants further steps towards lasting peace after the ceasefire and that the largest party, the upper party, also has the greatest responsibility to take steps in this regard. There's pressure in there, there's pressure in there, there's pressure in there, there's pressure in there, I would like to mention the cessation or suspension of military cooperation, any economic pressure. Suspension of the Association Agreement has been mentioned more often. Will the Dutch Government take that step, yes or no? I would like to comment specifically on the bombing of the mediators, or the building where there was a lot of international media. Associated Press has indicated that we have been in this building for fifteen years; we have not seen Hamas' activities at all. The US authorities inform via the media that they have not seen any evidence of the IDF that Hamas activity has taken place there. Will the Prime Minister be committed to an independent investigation into at least that particular bombardment? Because it is crucial that it is precisely from conflict areas that media can report directly itself in order to get some of the objective facts on the table. This attack is, in our opinion, contrary to international law and certainly not proportionate, on the basis of the information we have now. What is the Prime Minister's opinion on this? I am also going to talk about two other issues. I would like to join others, Mr Sjoerdsma and Mrs Piri, in their plea about corona and free PCR tests. I find the Dutch attitude incomprehensible, especially since it is now mainly the young people who seem to be responsible for the policy we have pursued here in the Netherlands. It is right that we should be aware of vulnerable groups and that we should start vaccination at the highest age, but that means that young people have not been vaccinated before the summer. They, of all people, must be tested at a high rate before they can make a trip abroad. From this point of view, too, we find it unacceptable that the Netherlands opposes the European approach to making tests available free of charge. I would also like to join the questions about Nord Stream 2. We have talked about this many times, but that is crucial. Mr. Chairman. Finally, one sentence on climate change. There is a lot at stake, but I hope the Prime Minister agrees with GroenLinks that it is not wise to bring the built environment and mobility under the ETS system. This is bad for the support base and it is not productive for our own national climate policy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-05-19-tweedekamer-8.u95", "speech text": "Thank you, Madam President. First of all, I would like to congratulate Mr Eppink and Mrs Piri. They were beautiful maiden speeches, in which it became clear that the personal is also full of politics and also plays a full role in political positions. Thanks for letting us have a look at that. Good luck and good luck in this room. I look forward to good debates, perhaps already today. Unlike colleagues, who all started with Israel and the Palestinians, I will end with that. I'll start with the COVID-19 coordination. We're all hoping for more room for manoeuvre. You can see the vaccination is paying off. At the same time, the question is what the Dutch position is when it comes to the digital green pass. I agree with the questions put by Mr Sjoerdsma, who says: let us now work to remove thresholds, especially for young people who have not yet been able to be vaccinated. At the same time, it has always been important for our group to retain the freedom that people have to be vaccinated. I will do so myself and encourage people to do so, but people must be free to make a choice. That is why freedom should also be given to people who, for whatever reason, do not want to be vaccinated. These people should eventually be able to travel freely, so it is nice that there is a tie-up of test and vaccination. But then the question is whether an expensive test, especially at a commercial station, does not raise a very high threshold; hence my support for Mr Sjoerdsma's question. Let us remove that threshold and ensure that people can move freely, but within the security and borders of our continent. For example, we may also be able to ensure that people can not only access commercial test streets, but also, for example, a GGD Test for Access location. Madam President. There is also a discussion on the intellectual property of vaccines. If we take away the patent, it could possibly promote production in countries such as India and South Africa. That could really make a difference there. Especially in India we see images of how dramatic that is. It would be nice if that could make a difference. I would therefore like to ask the question as to how we are in the Netherlands. In view of our own contribution to vaccination and the financial contribution to its development, does that not also give us the legitimacy to commit ourselves to suspending the patent and further producing those vaccinations, so that India also sees light at the end of the tunnel? I support the cabinet's call for 55% in terms of greenhouse gas reductions. Support that. As far as relations with Russia are concerned, I support the cabinet's commitment to promoting greater unity within the European Union in order to promote common European values and interests towards Russia. I would specifically like to ask what possibilities the Prime Minister sees for defending the position of Aleksej Navalny, someone who is fighting for freedom and democracy, who has been extremely brave in it and who pays a high price for it. What opportunities do we have to stand up for him? Finally, Madam President, Israel and the conflict with the Palestinians. I hope for peace. I hope that a fair solution will be found for both parties and that the suffering and the conflict will be brought to an end. That end will be when both peoples accept each other's presence and existence, and those others do not want to think away or hope that the other one is no longer there. This therefore calls for a genuine acceptance of the other, and for the other to be considered primarily as a human being and not as an enemy. I also regret any loss of life, from whoever, wherever. But what is at stake now, after more than 3,000 missiles from Gaza, is not a proportional reaction. That is Israel's right to exist as a safe place for Jews in a world full of anti-Semitism. That's what's at stake. In that sense, I was also able to understand the Prime Minister's first reaction. For a country with such a loaded history, for a people with such a loaded history, in a world in which anti-Semitism always and everywhere turns its head, I could very well understand that the Prime Minister stressed and defended the right to self-defense. The big question, of course, is how the European Union can be a force for peace and how our involvement in it can be balanced. I also refer to the role of Iran, as did Mr Bishop, as a major arms supplier of both Hamas and Hezbollah. That is extremely worrying. What particularly affects me when it comes to the European continent and our own country were the scenes in which we saw that the tension was passing from there to our streets and that there was pronounced anti-Semitism. That was visible in slogans and was audible. I would be happy if this were also condemned by the European Union. Would the Prime Minister like to make a commitment to this and also encourage his colleagues to fight together against this evil? Thank you."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-05-19-tweedekamer-8.u97", "speech text": "It is very serious what is happening in Israel and Palestine. That's what we agree on, I think, very soon. But once again I hear the emphasis on Israel's right to self-defense. What does he think of Israel's excessive violence towards the Palestinians, with more than 200 deaths against 12 Israeli deaths? What does he think of the Israeli attack on civilian targets in Gaza? What does he think of the attack on those mediators? Does he ever publicly deny that here?"}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-05-19-tweedekamer-8.u145", "speech text": "Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'm a Dutchman. I was formed by the great thinkers, the sailors, the famous painters and writers, and the innovators who are rich in Dutch history. By the farmers, the workers and the entrepreneurs, on whose basis our country was built. I was formed by a nation that believes in freedom in all its facets. A nation where equality is a fundamental concept. A nation that celebrates together when the Dutch national team wins. A nation that mourns together when tragedy strikes us. Through my veins the blood of the Africans also flows. A people who have come into being \"door us deserted plains with that moan of ossewa.\" But I am also the fruit of the VOC, of the Cape Malay slaves, of Krotoa, of English colonialism, of a history of heroism, but also of deep trauma. From colonial nationalism, African nationalism, African nationalism and rainbow nationalism. I carry the history of many nations, of many people and many languages. Each top-shaped chair in this room also represents a story and a history. Stories of different backgrounds and origins. But yet we all share the same big story. The story that connects us. The story we've been formed by this country we share. Although the similarities are sometimes difficult to find, we share this: our love for our Netherlands and a determined commitment to serve its people. Mr. Chairman. As I stand here as a result of a historic meeting between Europe and Africa, a meeting that has changed the world, we are all here today to discuss issues that can fundamentally change our world again. This applies first and foremost to the introduction of the corona passport. Let me be clear. Forum for Democracy is against any form of a corona passport and against any form of a test society. The cabinet also writes that it attaches importance to no direct or indirect vaccination coercion. At the same time, it is this cabinet that is frustrating within Europe when it comes to providing free testing. It seems so logical. The government introduces a test obligation, so the government pays for the test. But the Netherlands is therefore annoyed. This cabinet will allow ordinary families to pay hundreds of euros extra to be able to go on holiday, while the vaccines are free. This leads to indirect vaccination. Does the Prime Minister recognize that? Mr. Chairman. Our freedom is in danger. Forum for Democracy would prefer the cabinet to give up on this miserable plan, but if those corona passports do come, will the Prime Minister stop being obstructed? Will the Prime Minister undertake to issue travel certificates after performing a free test? And is the Prime Minister prepared to argue within the EU for a tough end date for the corona passport regime? This shouldn't be the new normal thing. Mr. Chairman. More worrying developments are taking place in the world. Israel's under attack. With Iran's support, Hamas is firing thousands of missiles at the Israeli civilian population. It's only because of Iron Dome that not many Israeli civilian deaths have occurred. I have therefore listened with amazement to the negative way in which some colleagues have spoken about Israel in the past period. They are stuck in their own victim-badder narrative, as if Israel did not have the right to defend itself and as if Dutch interference, let alone Dutch sanctions, would resolve the conflict in Israel. It's time for a sense of reality. It is not in the Dutch interest to play schoolmaster against Israel and Saint Nicholas against the Palestinians. It is in the Dutch interest to trade where that strengthens us and it is in the Dutch interest not to lecture like-minded countries, but to support them when they are under fire. The Prime Minister should therefore not agree with unilateral EU statements that wrong Israel's right to self-defense. We welcome the fact that Hungary did not endorse such a statement yesterday. Let Prime Minister Rutte follow that example. This shows once again the enormous importance of maintaining our veto in the EU in the field of foreign policy. And then there's the climate fiasco. The European Council considers that by 2030 the EU should emit 55% less CO than in 1990. In July, the European Commission will issue the corresponding law. This cabinet is totally fine with that. In fact, the Netherlands is in the so-called leading group. This is highly undesirable. The climate transition is costing us our prosperity and through the EU our sovereignty. The terminal: a Brussels superstate that destroys the smallest detail in our lives. You'll own nothing and you'll be happy. The Forum for Democracy will always oppose this. Forum for Democracy will always defend the sovereignty, prosperity and freedom of the Dutch people. Thank you, Mr. Chairman."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-05-19-tweedekamer-8.u147", "speech text": "Thank you, Mr. Chairman. This week, our cabinet will be discussing several important issues at the European summit. Many of them have been cited here. Israel and Palestine are not on the agenda, but keep our Chamber occupied. And rightly so, because that's what it's supposed to be about. As far as BET1 is concerned, Europe needs to work on its role in bringing closer to an end to the repression of the Palestinians and the beginning of a just solution. What we have seen in the past week is how 73 years of illegal annexations, apartheid laws and policies, ethnic cleansing and violence against Palestinians ultimately leads to serious situations. We saw how the lives of young children, the free press, clinics, schools and innocent civilians were not spared. Human Rights Watch concluded a few weeks ago that Israel is guilty of crimes against humanity. It concerns crimes of apartheid, as laid down in the Rome Statute. Nothing just goes away from the fist. Human Rights Watch isn't the first organisation in this area either, and that's not the best news for a country that has been under investigation since the beginning of this year by the International Criminal Court established here in The Hague. I look forward to the answers to the written questions I have put to Minister Blok. The Netherlands has always wanted to be friends so far, because that would mean more for the rights of Palestinians. But Israel has been abusing the coulant alliances in the West for over 70 years. With European and American support, Israel is able to suppress an entire people by means of violent or non-violent means. Some people don't see shame in that, I do. It is up to the Netherlands to opt for human rights in principle. But in practice, the Netherlands actually does exactly the opposite. Mr Rutte R\u00fctte and Mr Joost may know with what hat this week that the Netherlands is supporting Israel's right to self-defense, while in fact Israel is the aggressor who caused these escalations and refuses peace negotiations. While Hamas' bombings can count on a judgment, Israeli bombings remain free of the same judgment of this outgoing Prime Minister. The tweet was one-sided and completely ignores the structural suffering and oppressed position of Palestinians. I will therefore be tabling a motion in which I ask the Chamber to distance itself from this tweet, especially since we do not know with which hat it has been sent, from the Prime Minister's account. Mr. Chairman. It is time for the Netherlands to stop padding and keeping it wet. Good neighbourly policy towards Israel has not allowed international law and human rights to prevail, but has only brought further violence. It must be over with impunity. The Netherlands and Europe must draw a line. It is therefore important for the Netherlands, at the European summit, to call for the association agreement with Israel to be suspended. We must conclude that the policy of discouragement against settlements has not worked and we must turn this policy into an overall boycott of trade and investment in Israel's apartheid regime. It is important that the international community opts unconditionally for human rights and starts to sanction it. I wonder how the Prime Minister looks at these points. As far as BET1 is concerned, this is the sound that our government must make in addition to the important contribution of many colleagues here on the left, perhaps to the right, on all other important points, including at the European summit. Thank you very much, Mr President."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-05-19-tweedekamer-8.u154", "speech text": "Yes. So I'm going to continue with all the questions about the Middle East. I would also like to say that the aim of the Dutch Government is to try to prevent it from being regarded as pro-Israel or pro-Palestinian in its policy. We are trying to keep the equilibrium, because that is the only way the Netherlands can play a role in the conflict. And we are currently playing a modest role in the whole of the practical talks that are taking place between Israel and the Palestinians on, for example, cross-border issues. This is done at official level. It is one of the few contacts that are going on in which the Netherlands facilitates, for a number of years. This is greatly appreciated by both Abu Mazen and Netanyahu, as has been confirmed on Sunday. This also includes the fact that we try to avoid leaning to one side or to the other every time something is going on there. That is difficult, and you can see that in this debate too, because the debate in the Netherlands is, of course, very profiled, and those who are very pro-Israeli are opposed to those who are very pro-Palestinian interests. We can do all that, but the cabinet and I too are actually trying to prevent that from happening. Of course, this is never entirely objective; it cannot be done in such a conflict. But we always try to find a balance in our choice of words, which makes it possible for the Netherlands to play that role. That makes us quite unique in the world. We are truly one of the few countries in Europe where both the Palestinians and the Israelis turn to do business. I think there are a number of issues to be dealt with here, and I will end with my brief introduction, which has to be resolved. For example, the Netherlands is thinking about how to solve the issue of Palestinian division. In the end, you want the PA to be able to go back to Gaza. We think that is very important. We also think it is very important that Israel strengthens Abbas's position. What is happening now, of course, weakens the position of the Palestinian administration on the West Bank. A third issue relates to the reconstruction of Gaza. Again, there is the importance of predictability and speed, for example when deciding on the passage of building materials and other goods. I also think that the distinction between Israel and the settlements remains very strict in all aspects: not only in Dutch-Israeli cooperation, but also in the cooperation between Europe and Israel and, of course, in the Dutch efforts to bring Israelis and Palestinians together on both sides of the green line. With the trilateral groups I was talking about, we will also continue to try to solve these structural problems in the fields of water, energy and trade. The European Union also relies heavily on the Netherlands to continue with this. Mr. Chairman. Okay, here's a little introduction. Then I'll come to the questions. The first is, of course, about the Palestinian families in Sheikh Jarrah. We are very concerned about this expulsion, which I have just mentioned in general terms. We believe that this kind of unilateral action is contrary to international law. They also undermine the possibility of a two-state solution and can lead to further escalation. We think it is a good thing that there is a court ruling to postpone this threat of expulsion. We urge Israel to do so on Sunday in my conversation with Netanyahu on a lasting solution, so that those people can continue to live in their homes. We also have high-level contacts with the United States on this issue. My messages from Friday and Sunday are in line with each other in my view. I would also like to mention my entire Friday tweet, which consisted of two parts. In both cases, both Friday and Sunday, I drew attention to Israel's right to self-defense, but I also pointed out in both cases that there must be proportionate action within the limits of international law, in line with the Dutch position. I'm not sorry about those tweets either. It has been asked whether the annexation of Westbank is proportionate. The answer is no. This has also been expressed bilaterally and publicly by the cabinet on several occasions. Because of international pressure, but also because of the standardisation agreements between Israel and the UAE, annexation has now been suspended, as you know. We urge Israel to make that suspension final. Then, of course, there is the question of whether the government considers Israel's action to be proportionate. For this reason, we cannot judge every bombardment. We simply do not have the necessary operational information on the basis of the use of force. What we do do is remind Israel of its obligation under international law. Of course, we consider Hamas to be a terrorist organization. I think that is also relevant in the whole approach to this issue. We are indeed concerned about human rights violations arising from the conflict, for example as a result of Israeli settlement policy, but certainly also as a result of Palestinian violence against Israelis. The European Union's commitment is therefore that respect for international law and human rights is seen as a cornerstone of the Middle East Peace Process. Then I come to the question of whether the disarmament of Hamas is part of a ceasefire. We do not think it is realistic to make a ceasefire conditional on disarmament of Hamas. In the long term, it is simply necessary for the Palestinian Authority to return to Gaza. That is what the efforts are aimed at, but that is, of course, for the longer term. Yes, it is true that the right of veto is an excellent part of the European spectrum of instruments, but in areas of common foreign and security policy, in particular sanctions and human rights declarations, the cabinet is in favour of lifting that veto. At present, however, there is still insufficient support for this. There was a very specific question about Turkish Hamas terrorists. Mr De Roon said they had a passport. The notice on this can not be confirmed on its own. If members of terrorist organisations already had a Turkish passport, it would not make it any easier to enter the Schengen area, because visa granting at the border is by default subject to a check, including through the Schengen Information System. Then I come to the terrible story about the bombing of the mediators in Gaza. We are, of course, very concerned about this. It is crucial that the press remains safe and can report. Israel states that Hamas also used the tower. By the way, this is denied by the AP, the media organisation. We do not have any independent information on this. We believe that, after all that is happening now, there should be wide-ranging independent research on both sides, both Hamas and Israel. I say this specifically in response to questions from Mr Van der Lee, but also from others. We do not therefore have any independent information to determine whether that attack was proportionate. Then there is the question of whether we want to support Israel at EU level. As I said, the Netherlands supports Israel's right to self-defense, but within the limits of international law, including the issue of proportionality. A powerful country such as Israel, which has one of the strongest military forces in the world, naturally has a special responsibility. I've just said a few things about that. Of course Israel has the right to self-defense in that context. Then there was the question: how do we look at the next steps if a cease-fire were to come? We believe that the idea put forward on this subject, namely a suspension of the association agreement, is not sensible. This is the political and legal basis for cooperation between the EU and Israel and is therefore an important instrument for relations. We, as the Netherlands and as the European Union, are engaged in an intensive dialogue with Israel, but also with the Palestinian side. That is precisely what is needed in order to be able to raise all the issues that arise in this case. Then a question was asked about the message that Israel would have two schools in sight in Gaza. The people in the schools and surroundings were indeed warned. The bombings, according to our information, have finally stopped. Then several questions were asked about the term \"apartheid.\" As I have already said, the cabinet is concerned about the general situation in the occupied Palestinian territories. The report by Human Rights Watch shows the impact of the occupation on the lives of Palestinians and the unequal status between the inhabitants of the settlements and the Palestinians in that area. The cabinet is reluctant to use qualifications such as \"apartheid\" until such qualification has been established by an international court. Then there was also the specific question of how we look at the Karabulut motion on a concrete step-by-step plan. Are we working on that? Yes, of course. Stef Blok, the Foreign Minister, asked the High Representative and the Special Representative, Mr Koopmans, our former colleague here yesterday; 'your former colleague', from this role, I should say, in fact, to propose concrete measures, with concrete lessons for reconstruction, but also with concrete steps in response to the events that preceded the violence, such as the already mentioned threatening home expulsions, the expansion of settlements, the rebellious rhetoric on both sides and the re-arming by and of Hamas. I think this also affects Mr Van Dijk's question about the adopted SP motion to map options. We do this both bilaterally and at EU level. There is also the pressure on it, and the standardisation agreement with the United Arab Emirates, which can be helpful in this and which is at least at the moment. Then there is the demand for the Netherlands. I think that the Netherlands can indeed do some things here. Of course, we should not overestimate ourselves, but we do have a special position. That is why I made my own phone call with the leading players on Sunday, but Stef Blok is also very active in this whole process. I think he'll catch you up on that tomorrow. The Oslo agreements are and remain the basis for the Netherlands and the European Union. At all levels, we have contacts, both with Israel and with the P.A., but also with the countries in the region, in order, hopefully, to promote a direct ceasefire. I believe that the quartet, i.e. the EU, the US, the UN and Russia, is united in their efforts to achieve a ceasefire. We support the European Union's commitment to this. We expect the Special Representative Koopmans to play a role in this. Mr. Chairman. Mr Sjoerdsma asked a question about the two-state solution. I think we should learn from the events of the past period. We appeal to both sides to take steps which make the two-state solution more difficult. This was also discussed yesterday by Stef Blok in the extra Foreign Affairs Council. That is why, when the EU becomes active there through the Special Representative, it has been said again: make use of the lessons of recent years, and certainly of the last few days. I agree with Sjoerdsma on this point: to be effective, the largest possible EU unit is necessary. In this respect, it is, of course, very regrettable that Hungary has finally refused to join the unanimity procedure. But the High Representative has come up with a statement on behalf of the 26. I think it's relevant that in the end one country didn't participate, and not a whole group. Then there was another question about military cooperation. It is true that the Netherlands and Israel are working together on a military basis. That is subject to strict conditions. For example, there is no joint practice of operational military operations and cooperation takes place only within the pre-1967 limits. In terms of arms exports and arms embargo, we have a very restrictive arms export policy against Israel. Each possible transaction shall be assessed on an individual basis on the basis of the criteria set out in the European Common Position on Arms Exports, which is also in line with the UN Trade Agreement. We believe that an arms embargo is unwise in this context. Finally, a number of questions about Israel and the Dutch context. I think that Stef Blok, the Minister for Foreign Affairs, rightly appointed in Monday's letter the right to demonstrate as a fundamental right, but anti-Semitic expressions should not be part of that. It is unacceptable, I think, I hope that we all agree with it if people hold the Jewish community responsible for Israeli government policy or believe in it to find a basis for anti-Semitic expression. As a cabinet, we strongly distance ourselves from that. I hope that we will be supported by a large majority in this Chamber. It is up to the mayors to finally take measures in the triangle that match the local situation. This morning, there was a meeting with Minister Grapperhaus of Justice and Security, the G4 mayors and the Chiefs of Police, to exchange information and agree on how best to act, again, of course, in view of local circumstances. That is also what I am saying in response to Mr De Roon's question. Finally, Mr President, there was also Mr De Roon's question to stop all support for Palestinian regional organisations and to offer all the money to Israel. We're not gonna do that."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-05-19-tweedekamer-8.u185", "speech text": "I completely dispute that this would be a conspiracy that wasn't in balance. I think that is the Dutch policy of this cabinet. Israel has the right to self-defense, within all the limits that are also contained in the Twitter report. I have also given this further context in connection with my phone calls on Sunday, including what has happened there recently. Stef Blok has also developed this further in his letter. I, of course, touched that on Sunday, also in the telephone conversations, to maintain the status quo at the sacred places. This is crucial in order not to complicate matters further. There's a threat of deportation for four refugee families. Of course it will be said on the Israeli side: Israel had already lost that case before 1948. But there is no balance in this, because that cannot be done on the Palestinian side, so we are nevertheless calling for the suspension not only of these house expulsions, but of them at all. In this way, we are always trying to look in reasonable terms at what is wise, to keep that balance well, but also, more importantly, to be an interlocutor on both sides. And that's us on both sides. Not many of them in the world. I'm not personal, but that's just consistent Dutch politics, since 2012."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-05-19-tweedekamer-8.u187", "speech text": "I therefore find, because of the violence from Hamas, which in any case is unacceptable from a terrorist organisation, that Israel is acting in self-defense. I think that's the whole situation. The question has been asked here, I believe by GroenLinks and others, that this should be evaluated independently. I think it is very important to establish exactly what happened there. The Netherlands has no independent position, for example around those mediators, or Israel's claim is correct, or Gaza's claim and also AP is correct. We cannot see that. That's why I think you really need independent research to do that."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-05-19-tweedekamer-8.u309", "speech text": "Mr President, thank you very much. First of all, thank you to the Prime Minister for answering the questions. I shall confine myself to one motion. [[Motion]] [[The Chamber,]] [[heard the debate,]] [[Whereas Israel is entitled to proportionate self-defense;]] [[noting that Hamas violates international (war) law by using unguided missiles that fall on civilian targets, and employing civilians as human shields;]] [[calls on the Government to support Israel's legitimate self-defense in the context of the EU cease-fire efforts and to promote conditionality to prevent Hamas and other terrorist organisations from re-arming,]] [[and goes to the order of the day.]] [[This motion has been proposed by Mr Bishop.]] [[She's getting No. kst-11501-20-1688]]"}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-05-25-tweedekamer-28.u128", "speech text": "I'm glad to hear that. I don't understand the defense of Islam. But I have a point from the beginning of Mrs Simons' speech which I would have liked to have clarified. I thought I heard some criticism of the chairman for a moment. I would like to know exactly what Mrs Simons' criticism of the President was."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-05-26-tweedekamer-9.u20", "speech text": "Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Last year, several people and organisations suddenly came under the scrutiny of Defence, from the aforementioned Land Information Manoeuvre Centre, to be precise. This centre collected information about Dutch society on a large scale. It would include the yellow hoes, Viruswanzing and jensen.nl. But also statements by politicians, including my group chairman Geert Wilders, would have been gathered. All that information ended up in a computer system that needed to predict automated social unrest. It was focused on the corona crisis, we read, but the center was also meant to experiment with information-driven action. We now know that this experiment has failed miserably. Defence has simply gone beyond its bounds, because the necessary legal basis for this project was completely lacking. What this military unit did had nothing to do with the core business of Defense. Nor has any action been taken at the request of civil authorities. Nor did the military branch fall under the Intelligence and Security Services Act. And what remains is a frankly shady situation. That shady situation lasted no less than eight months. Mr. Chairman. The PVV first of all wonders how it is possible that the Minister had no control over this for so long. The Minister indicated earlier that she was aware of the existence of the LIMC, but that she did not know exactly what dates were collected. That is painful, because it was clear from the beginning that this was a sensitive operation. Of course, it should never have taken place under the radar of the Minister in charge. I'm afraid that's what happened here. Can the Minister comment on her own direction, or the lack of it? Mr. Chairman. When the press came out of what this military unit was doing, they were in an acute phase of denial within the Defense Department. In a response to the NRC, the defense stated that all this can be done, even without a mandate. There would have been no legal barrier to the collection of the information, even if reports from this military unit were shared externally. That's what it says literally in the said newspaper. Of course, such a reaction should never have seen the light, because it doesn't make any sense. So I want to know from the Minister why he spoke so uglyly for her turn with this reaction. At least the reaction could have been: we're going to investigate this. I would point out in abundance that, of course, it is not good for confidence if everyone has to start doubting what Defence brings out in the media or otherwise. Mr. Chairman. Finally, I assume that in answering all the questions, the Minister will also take a small word of apology to those whose expressions have thus been collected and processed without a legal basis. She doesn't have to name everyone, because then we might be here for a while, but in general, excuses are of course more than justified. I can leave it at that in the first place, Mr President."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-05-26-tweedekamer-9.u32", "speech text": "Mr. Chairman. The digital domain can no longer be excluded from the work of the Defense Department. Reports from our intelligence services show how dangerous and versatile the digital threats are from state actors, such as Russia, China and Iran, and on the other hand non-state actors, such as terrorist groups and criminal networks. I therefore believe that a strong digital defence is vital. Precisely because this domain is so in development, there is sometimes a need for a sound discussion about the scope and therefore the powers of Defence. Then it's always about the tension between privacy on the one hand and security on the other. It is often said that security is a matter of privacy. In my opinion, this is a false contradiction, because often privacy is also security. The more private data is collected, the greater the damage caused by burglary or abuse. In a rule of law, the government protects against external threats, but also against itself. Of course, a good balance is not easy to find. Following the discussion on the Land Information Manoeuvre Centre, the LIMC, the Minister indicated that it is necessary for our security to collect and process a lot of data quickly. The SGP stresses that this must be done within the legal frameworks and principles. It is about the right to self-defense, human rights and humanitarian war law, but also about the fact that the civilian understanding of the armed forces falls under civilian authority. The GDPR also requires that personal data are processed in a lawful, fair and transparent manner only for certain legitimate purposes. My question to the Minister is whether she can confirm that these are the general frameworks with which and within which our military forces must work consistently. The research report also shows that the LIMC has processed special personal data about political views, with the aim of feeding military and civil decision-making with insight and perspective of action in relation to COOVID-19. That objective was not justified. There has also been no data protection impact assessment. This means that the GDPR has been violated. The SGP Group considers this to be a serious matter. My key question to the Minister is therefore: what comfort can the Minister offer us that this does not happen again, and does the implementation of the six recommendations, as expressed in the letter, have the highest priority? I also have another pressing question. Is the current legal framework for information-driven action not too restrictive, so that tasks necessary for the defence of our territory cannot be sufficiently exercised? Is there sufficient scope for effective digital operation in mission areas? Are the financial frameworks sufficient? I ask the Minister to inform the Chamber of whether this is the case and how other EU and NATO countries are tackling it. I would like to have a commitment to that. If not, I'll have a motion in the back pocket for the second term. Thank you."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-05-26-tweedekamer-9.u54", "speech text": "I really liked the beginning of Mr Boswijk's speech, especially the fact that he mentioned how fantastic the armed forces were using assistance during COVID-19, either on request or through an offer to which the other said: that seems to us to be a good idea. Today, of course, we are talking about a situation in which we were not asked to do so. You describe very much a picture of where that came from. You're talking about the sense of military: we want to do something, we can do something and we don't know how it ends. You just see it all happen. I'm a long enough defense spokesperson to know how... \"Love\" is not the good word, but I know how much love and love soldiers are committed to the safety, peace and order of everyone. I don't think I have to explain that to you. At the same time: if you're looking for an explanation for where it came from, that sounds a bit like some kind of condoning of the fact that it happened. Through you, Mr President, I will say that I do not really care where it comes from when it comes to such important matters. Although someone had world peace as an intention; I believe all of that, but if one decides to exceed legal tasks and rules, it should never legitimize or mitigate what is ultimately your conclusion. My question to Mr Boswijk is whether that was his intention, whether he explained it so extensively, whether or not he intended it. And does he agree with me that it doesn't matter what the reason is, that it's okay to name it, but it doesn't really matter?"}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-05-26-tweedekamer-9.u107", "speech text": "Look, one of those Land Information Manoeuvre centers. Covid was used for that experiment. We just talked about that. I have explained quite clearly that it should not have happened the way it happened. Of course, gathering that information is very important to the defense. That has to do with the fact that you have knowledge, that you know what the situation looks like. It's not just an enemy that matters. You keep talking about an enemy, but it's also important for the DOD to know the terrain, to know what the situation looks like, to know the roads, to know who's where, to know where the exits of a building are. It sounds crazy, but that's all information gathering and that's what goes with it. So we don't necessarily have to think \"in an enemy.\" That's important. Sometimes there's an enemy, sometimes there's not. Sometimes we take an example of Lithuania as a form of deterrent at the border. That's an operation. But it's more than just an enemy, I just want to say."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-05-26-tweedekamer-9.u108", "speech text": "The Minister says quite clearly: when it comes to these tasks, to the creation of the units, there is actually a mandate in this first and second task without the Minister being involved or politically responsible. But this was the third task. And it has acted as if it were a war situation. You can also see in those reports words as \"the opponent\" and \"action perspectives.\" I'm putting the question sharply. Because we can pretend something happened that we didn't foresee. No, a military structure has been chosen in times of peace in a situation where the enemy is absent. The population is not the enemy. People who don't think about things the way they are in government policy aren't the enemy. That's not supposed to be a defense task, is it?"}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-05-26-tweedekamer-9.u259", "speech text": "Actually, you're asking another question. Of course, that's not how it's supposed to be. But if it has a purpose, then one of my defense personnel can always be on Wikipedia. Because then it has a purpose. But the point was that Mr. Boswijk put that in the frame that he sometimes looks at it and then comes from one to the other. Here, of course, something has happened that you think should not be done and it has nothing to do with it as far as we know, but that still comes from further research. Then I think that's where I don't think it's going well. So the way it's happened now, it shouldn't be. That is my answer to the second question. I think that Mr Boswijk is looking at this differently, but we do not need to put that down to the extreme."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-05-27-tweedekamer-10.u72", "speech text": "The tension is increasing. It will be a nice Rotterdam warm-up for Mrs Kathmann, as we are used to. Minister, Chairman and colleagues. Important subject: undermining. Police, Customs, law, OM, politics, garage companies, catering, contractors, notaries, hairdressers, it's all sectors and branches that have to do with undermining. In other words, how the underworld enters the upper world. So it's very good that we're talking about this huge problem. Pieter Tops calculated it. In 2017, 18 billion euros of criminal money were squandered. At the same time, we believe that this also destroys the foundations of the rule of law that we know. We have now become, like it or not, the epicentre of drug trafficking, hard drug trafficking, crime and the false romance of freedom, joy that used to hang over drug policy in the Netherlands. That romance is way behind us, I think. A murdered lawyer, in hiding mayors, torture containers, we're talking about that now. It is therefore a good thing that this issue has absolute top priority of all of us, especially of justice, not only in words, but also by adding powers and instruments where necessary. Then we go to the concrete proposals, such as increasing the penalty for threats from two to three years. In the meantime, more things have been said about it. We also think that JA21 has a good reasoning behind this, but this selection of professional groups has something arbitrary. Individual civil servants, port workers, farmers or catering entrepreneurs also face threats in practice. They are, I think, a lot more defenseless for drug criminals than a mayor, to name a profession. That is why my group would have preferred to see a further increase in penalties across the board than the three years it has now become. The four years proposed by the VVD, as I read in the written consultation, would have been a better alternative. The hard drugs industry is increasingly adapting to our new rules and is able to react very quickly. It is very good that we should respond to this by banning the transport or possession of chemicals, chemicals, precursors. Certainly it is not a panacea, but all are certainly a step towards shortening the life cycle of new chemicals for designer drugs, as the cabinet states in the memo. We also found SP and PVV to have said useful things about this. We also support the protection of the infrastructure vulnerable to undermining, such as ports, airports, railway emplacements and so on. Mr. Chairman. It is all a drop in the ocean, if we are honest, given the huge scale of this problem, especially drug smuggling. Take the Rotterdam harbour alone, where it is no longer necessary to climb illegally over fences. An investigation by Customs itself, for two and a half months, shows that people could move freely on the port site. So it comes not only from outside but also from inside. The question is what is the use of a bill against intruders when criminals can easily get onto the premises legally. How's the secretary gonna act on this? I'd like a response. The Zeehaven Police also found that criminals migrated to Antwerp during the period during which that control took place. That is, of course, a good thing. Then it makes sense, if you tighten things up at that point. Then we might be able to use more permanent controls. We are considering tabling a motion on this subject, but first we would like a response from the Minister on permanent controls. Then there's the cost story. A useful measure, we think. You see those synthetic drug labs in Brabant and Limburg. We read that the costs of dumping drug waste, which mostly affects the southern provinces, are not covered by this measure. Why not? I'll ask the Minister. In the report of the written consultation, I read that the Minister considers it sufficient that municipalities and individuals can work on this through the civil courts or the administrative courts. But why not go through the state detectives, I wondered. Why not give the D.A. the power to recover those costs themselves? Why give municipalities money to clean up the drug waste, but not use the legal opportunity to recover the costs of police and prosecutors on these perpetrators? I'd like a response. Finally, Mr President. I come within the desired five-minute time limit, but I'm not there yet; this is a cliffhanger. JA21 is a strong supporter of picking convicts. In addition to punishment, we also consider the balding of criminals who put that money in their pockets to be very good. But then I would like to draw attention to two issues. We all know that criminals, especially drug criminals, are guided by the desire for materialism. That means you can hit them very hard by depriving them of that ability. But also by appearances. Of course, we often see this in our city of Rotterdam. People without jobs but with youth pimples, we always say, who drive a giant car, a BMW of one and a half tons. We think they have some explaining to do. These are the so-called vigor actions, known from the big city, popularly called \"pater controls.\" Can we not intensify it, I ask the Minister. Wouldn't that be very good? Roll out those actions all over the country. Just show me why you're driving a car like that, where you get that money, the reverse evidence. Then it is very often called against that it is ethnic profiling, but that has nothing to do with it. These actions, such as those taking place in Amsterdam and Rotterdam, are about appearances. I know that the Minister has a good eye for the city of Rotterdam and also for Amsterdam, so he will certainly have an opinion on it. What do you think of that? Finally, money laundering, also something that we must strongly oppose. By now we know that the shopping streets, even in the big cities, are not only shopping streets, but unfortunately in practice also money laundering streets. These are unsavory streets with a lot of call shops, money exchange offices, shishalounges, hairdressing shops without chairs, in short: things that don't add up, people with very dark business and weird business operations. We want to do something about that, because we cannot accept that these criminal corporations dominate our streets. We have also seen many actions against this; national actions of the Public Prosecutor, the Tax Office, the Labour Inspectorate, the Chamber of Commerce, everything is connected with it. I saw that again in Amsterdam. Is the Minister prepared to step up such actions nationwide, to do so much more often and to dismantle the money-laundering streets? Is he prepared to step up this sector-by-sector? I have a motion for this in my back pocket. The question is how the Minister looks at this, otherwise I would very much like to hear the opinion of the Chamber. Mr President, I will conclude. I'll have a drink of water."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-06-09-tweedekamer-5.u47", "speech text": "So I shall come back to that connection with other committees in the Chamber in a moment. Mr. Chairman. The building blocks for a trend break are there, I think, and the need for a turning point is certainly there. 'Cause what about that responsibility? I'd say he's been on the elevator for years. Alone, I'm afraid that elevator is going down. This year it was already remembered there were no less than 50 imperfections, of which 2 were serious. There were more departments this year that did cross the border for errors and unlawful acts than departments that did not. For years, I have called it our expensive duty not to slacken, because we must guard the legacy of the 1980s and 1990s, which I have just mentioned. The biggest mistake we can make right now is to see these problems as an incident. 'Cause, uh, the corona crisis, huh? Of course it offers a context for the imperfections, but it is not a indulgence for all sins. Sometimes I hear the false contradiction between legality on the one hand and managing the crisis on the other. It ignores missed opportunities for interim action, the structural causes that vexed last year and the long-standing trend of rising error rates. And yes, then those weaknesses in a crisis come to light mercilessly, and then it turns out that checks-and-balances are in order. Mr. Chairman. I'll start with the Department of Defense. This year, unfortunately, again no flag or flag. But there are signs of recovery and modernisation. Yet the dominant image remains that the foundations are fragile. I have three points to make. Firstly, two deficiencies were solved, but also two new ones were immediately added. Most of all, my group is concerned about the worsening situation surrounding the ammunition supply. How does the cabinet view the Court of Auditors and, in particular, the worsening situation in the administration of the ammunition stock, I ask the person in charge who wants to take it up. Secondly, the report from the visor, which showed that defense cut nearly 0.5 billion less than planned. Could the Minister of Finance reflect on this? When did the DOD see this coming? And how could it have deviated so far from the financial plan? Thirdly, therefore, this year the Court of Auditors notes this serious flaw in real estate management. The interdepartmental policy research on this issue is also very critical. That's no small thing when you realize that Defence has to manage no less than 11,000 buildings and 340 million square meters of land, as much as the area of the municipalities of Amsterdam, The Hague and Utrecht together. The insight into the value and maintenance of the real estate is limited, and the collaboration with the Rijksvaastgoedbedrijf remains suboptimal. I would like to hear, also from the Secretary of State, how this problem will be resolved swiftly. Mr. Chairman. Then I come to Health, Welfare and Sport, VWS, where the Court of Auditors also found a serious flaw and even used the instrument of objection. The financial management of VWS has not suddenly deteriorated during the corona crisis. The Court of Auditors has been warning us for many, many years. Although the figures and qualifications that fly around in the public debate are not all equally accurate, Mr Heinen also referred to this issue, but it is clear that financial management has been out of control. We can see, for example, that the Court of Auditors is heavily critical of the buying-in of the corona policy, while the purchasing process of the National Consortium Resources has not even been specifically investigated. The agreement with the Relief Goods Alliance B.V. may have become the most painful example of this. We still have some questions about this deal, but they have also been put in writing. An external investigation has been announced, and there will be another legislative consultation on the VWS annual report. However, for the wider picture, I also ask the Minister of Finance how he looks at the added value of the Court of Auditors to investigate this, not just the case, but all three major deals that exceed 100 million. Because only then can you draw the equation. Are these all being included in that independent investigation? And can these become public right now? Mr. Chairman. If I then zoom out of the financial management of VWS, the role of the Ministry of Finance will also be shown. So can the Minister of Finance also indicate what his involvement was, when the signals came to him last year that the financial management at VWS was not doing well and what was done then? It was only last month that this improvement plan came from the Court of Auditors, and perhaps there was also a responsibility of the Ministry of Finance. Mr. Chairman. So two serious flaws. I believe that we in the Chamber should be able and willing to follow this approach in the near future, so that we are not shocked again until next May that it is still not in order. So I think that the Chamber should also take more intensive care of this. It seems to me that it is important that the Committee on National Expenditure also cooperates with the other committees that the Committee on VWS and the Committee on Defence itself are in charge of this, but that we provide backup and other support from the Committee on National Expenditure. Tomorrow morning, therefore, we will meet for the first time as a committee with the rapporteurs from all the other committees. This increased monitoring also requires the directors of VWS and Defense to keep us informed more often than only in the annual report. I will therefore table a motion in the second term to receive two progress reports on this subject for the next annual report, so that it can also be discussed with the responsible directors. Mr. Chairman. I'm joining the Compatibility Act. I think that many people can understand the fact that exceptional times call for exceptional measures. The problem is that even the exception clauses have not been respected; Mr Heinen has already spoken about them. Instead of a normal budget, the exception is that incidental supplementary budget, which is then subject to the emergency control provided for in Article 2.27, i.e. I shall start to spend, but the Chamber has been informed. But even those minimum requirements have been violated to a considerable extent. These events give sufficient grounds to evaluate the Compatibility Act. I believe it is scheduled for five years after entry into force. If that 1 January 2018 has entered into force, then that will also be the case. So what is the plan of action and what is the precise time plan for this evaluation? Is the Minister of Finance also prepared to include in this evaluation how the Ministry of Finance itself has been twice called upon by the General Court of Auditors, and whether this is due to the law itself or to its implementation? I'm very curious about that myself. Then the Monitor Brede Prosperity. It is increasingly being taken into account in the formulation of these objectives, the effectiveness and effectiveness of that Article 3.1. I was pleasantly surprised by the self-reflection and preview of this year's cabinet response to the Monitor Brede Welvaart. After years in which the enthusiasm, especially of Mr Van Raan, came from this Chamber and other parts of the House of Representatives, this seems to have taken up a post in the cabinet and that enthusiasm seems to be shared; for which compliments. The next step is to integrate the Broad Prosperity Monitor or the core set the planning agencies are talking about into the policy cycle. I'm glad the Cabinet is prioritizing that. My question is: is it going to be prepared for this? Mr. Chairman. When we talk about setting and evaluating objectives, I also get..."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-06-09-tweedekamer-8.u79", "speech text": "It sounded like a request, but I would like to put it a little more firmly. I would like to have that, because on that basis I can see exactly what is in it and what you can do about it as a Chamber. In the supplementing affair, we have put the lawyer at \u20ac600 per hour for people who had very little and who barely had a defense. I think we should also set up a legal expert on this. I'd like that. I'm gonna ask the Prime Minister if he can release those documents."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-06-09-tweedekamer-8.u281", "speech text": "Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thanks to Members for their input in the first term. I understand that you all have no problem starting dinner at 9.30 p.m., so thank you for the opportunity to answer. You can just leave, I can't. I would actually like to deal with three blocks and then answer a number of questions. Since there have not been so many questions, it is nevertheless good to clarify some of the issues, where the Minister of Finance has a little more limited, for my part. This is about the state-wide management in general. This is about ICT and information security. This is about the sustainability of business. In addition, a number of questions have been asked about the real estate of the Defense Department, which I will take care of. I am very proud to say that in the past year, in a very difficult time, the government has actually adapted very quickly and very well to the situation in which we have all gotten involved. It was a real crisis. It was a health crisis, but it was also a crisis in which everyone had to do things differently than in the years before. A number of you have already said it in the debate: it is also a very nice moment afterwards. We have not quite finished the evaluations yet to see how to do things differently and better. You usually do that one step at a time. Now all of a sudden everything had to be done. That was accompanied by things that went very well. That was also accompanied by things that could be better. But most of all, we've learned a lot of lessons. I think it was Mr Snels who said the same thing. We were able to apply those lessons immediately. I would also like to pay great tribute from this place to all government officials. Of course, this applies to all the people in the Netherlands who have contributed to it, but I am specifically responsible for the government officials. In these difficult circumstances, they have made their best efforts to their credit and conscience, which has led to a great deal of rapid progress. A number of examples have already been mentioned by the Chamber. Let's take a look at what that organization's been up to for the past year. One had to work at home at another time. It was a lucky accident that we had the systems in order, so we could. The people were able, with the exception of those who really fulfilled a vital function to be performed at the workplace, to work very quickly from home. Before that we had facilities ready in the form of the digital infrastructure. It actually worked, with a few minor comments, very well. I am glad that in recent years, also on the basis of reports from the Court of Auditors, investments have been made in this good digital infrastructure. It also led to very large social effects. What does it do to people when they have to work from home and they don't see their colleagues anymore? We are all social beings and from one day to the next you are sitting in your room in Webex with colleagues and that against the backdrop of another crisis that would come next, that of the childcare allowance, where it was of course also the question of whether there was any real contact. Is there any way to have real contact in this digital world? Despite the crisis we were in, opportunities have nevertheless been found, including in a state-wide sense, to bring service to the citizens. Although it is not the subject of this debate, I can announce that we have taken a number of measures and have made plans to work towards the future, based on the lessons we have learned, with the working environment for the future, with hybrid works, in whatever form. I am really convinced that we must take advantage of the lessons that have happened to us all and not just turn to business as usual and fall back into our old behavior. I think we could really get the good things out of this structuralally. Looking at the way we have all done this and the role of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in it, I note that we have been able to do this mainly with conviction and good cooperation. I do not have a Compliance Act, which has, of course, been quoted a lot today, on the basis of which I was able to do so, but there was just a broad conviction that we were all going to do it. In that conversation, in that consultation, we're still sitting. I am pleased with that, and I believe in it, because in the end, not only the experience of the departments, but also of the people who have done that work mean that we are going to do things differently and better. Then I'll get to the second block. That is ICT and information security. This is a difficult subject, which has been the subject of attention for many years, including from the Court of Auditors. This has to do with the fact that we are in a situation where on the one hand we are becoming increasingly dependent - and, on the other hand, corona has made that clear - of the fact that we need to digitally and at the same time the threats have increased. We're not in a static state. Every day, we have to keep our lines of defence in order, keep them in order, and with all kinds of government organisations, implementation organisations, co-governments, because, of course, criminals and other actors seek out the weaknesses and thus question the legitimacy and integrity of these systems. This is something we need to avoid, because citizens and businesses need to be able to trust that information and services are actually in the right hands of the public authorities and that all kinds of data are not compromised. When it comes to information security, we were also confronted with the Citrix crisis at that time. I welcome the fact that the Court of Auditors has made a positive comment on this. The Court of Auditors has, of course, the legal task of indicating where things are not going well, where there are shortcomings and where any objections are raised. Here, I think we have been able to show that what we had prepared also worked in practice. We learned from that again, so we can only do better. I thought it was a good example where you can see how, from the direction of steering, that steering is not based on legislation other than the Compatibility Act, which has worked well together several parts of the Empire, in particular the CIO Empire and the NCTV, to ensure that we could act on that very quickly. Nor did it cause any major problems. So that calls for attention all the time. In doing so, I do not have the expectation and illusion that all the shortcomings in this area will be resolved next year, without being able to complete next year's annual report, because there will always be new challenges. That is an additional need to give it from the Empire's side more than ever before the attention it deserves. Of course, your Chamber has already acted on this by setting up its own committee for digitisation. Then I come to sustainability. About this goal you could say: are you for or against sustainability? Even if you're against sustainability, it's still a very good goal to pursue, because it just pays off. It makes sure that we buy all kinds of products better, that we leave less behind and that it can often be cheaper. In my view, it should therefore be a supporter of doing so, even if I am looking in the direction of the Minister of Finance. If it delivers money or saves money, then that's something to pursue. There are many examples of this. Because of time, I will not go into detail about this now. It's something I think we should continue along that road. I would like to return to the specific questions raised in relation to the information security and management of the Empire. First of all, Mr Snels' question. He asked what BZK will do with the recommendation of the Court of Auditors to work more actively on the problems currently facing the shared service organisations, the agencies and the Zbos. That appeal from the Court of Auditors is in line with the approach I presented last year and sent to the Chamber by letter of September 2020. That approach was about the follow-up to the 2019 accountability report. This too is a subject that has been on the agenda for several years. At the moment a plan of approach is being drawn up at BZK for all shortcomings and concerns, as it should be. The monitoring of the shortcomings and concerns is an integral part of the Ministry's internal planning and control cycle. The weaknesses in purchasing management in two parts of a shared service organisation, UBR, have recently been resolved. In the other organisations, such as SSC-ICT and P-Direkt, we are also taking good steps to solve the problems identified. This also applies to the fact that signaling the problem just means that you are almost sure that in the years after you are working to solve it. This also applies to the route we are going through at SSC-ICT, which should be completed by 2022. The approach we adopt is supported by the General Court. Then there is a question from Mr Sneller. Referring to the fact that a Digital Affairs Committee was set up, he reminded me of a discussion that had previously been held in this Chamber about the usefulness or necessity of a state inspection digitisation. That was the Middendorp motion at the time. Mr Sneller wondered: \"There was no national inspection. What are the alternatives? Has the mind stopped or is that going on?\" We did have that discussion. We didn't choose a state inspection digitization. In the debate we have had on this subject, I indicated that the basis for that inspection is a very different one from the Compatability Act under which the National Finance Inspectorate operates, where financial management is concerned. We have chosen to control the provision of information to the State Service with a number of measures and to strengthen that provision of information. This means that the Decision CIO-system of the National Service 2021 has now entered into force. This enables us to steer and strengthen the management of the IV and ICT domains. We do this by, among other things, positioning the CIO at the board table. That may not seem very important, but that is an important element, because it makes an immediate contribution from the CIO at the heart of the decision-making process. In addition, the CISO, the new function we created, will also be more strongly positioned under the CIO. The cooperation between all the departmental CIOs in that CIO council should ensure that these experiences and knowledge in the departments get a place in the heart of business operations. We also do this with the quality framework for departmental information plans. That'll give you more unity. You do that in a natural way. You're gonna keep all that from being formally imposed right away. In this discussion, agreements are made on how the departments will work together. There is therefore a form of convergence which leads to more uniformity. That is not wrong in itself, because of course we are talking about one government. It would be weird if every department did it their way. But you do feel that there is such a thing as ministerial responsibility. That's gotta come together. That CIO Council and the ministerial responsibility laid down in the Constitution should not ultimately clash. We have also discussed this on several occasions in the cabinet. This is a line that is worn widely. For insight into the state of ICT in the government we have created a dashboard. We have said of this in the first instance: it is good to add projects that are currently in progress. Mr Sneller himself was one of those who said: \"We should also include that management and maintenance, which may not be a part that gets all the attention in the beginning. This is perhaps at least as important; it involves a lot of costs.\" I have already promised you that we will have that operational at the beginning of 2022. I still keep that promise. The supervisory role of the ICT Examination Bureau, which has been established, I would like to remind you that for all those who are new to the Chamber of Representatives on the basis of the Elias Committee, a permanent advisory body is being transformed at this time. In addition to the tasks already carried out by BIT, this involves advising on maintenance and management activities. It will also play a more active role in knowledge transfer and new additional forms of advice. For example, you should think of official organisations, but it could also be in the direction of the Chamber. I expect to be able to consult the draft law on the establishment of this permanent advisory body within two weeks. So that's on schedule on its own. I would like to thank Mr Eerdmans for his compliments on the speed of the changeover. I just said something about that. I'm referring to the other work in the government. It's just... it's just... it's just... it's There is a whole palette of examples of what has gone well. At the same time, we know that some things can be better. For that, this debate is taking place: how can we avoid making the same thing as this year next year? Mr Snels asked where information security is going wrong: what are the risks and what lessons are being drawn? Mr Stoffer asked: how is the cabinet going to make a step harder in the area of information security and IT management? Mr Grinwis added the question of what we are going to do in practice in this area. The General Court notes that there are still many shortcomings in the field of information security. I'm not happy about that. But with that increasing threat level, which is not a static whole, the bar goes up. In the kind of race that is taking place, we must ensure that security is kept in order with good people and good techniques. That, of course, leads to shortcomings. In recent years, we've seen that the government is a target. This is not just about the government, but also about the other governments or semi-governments. It is believed that there is money to be raised and wants to cause unrest by disrupting and shutting down systems. This will lead to damage for citizens and businesses very quickly. That is why we are very committed to this. The new role of the CISO, the Chief Information Security Officer, is an English term, but \"CISO\" still sounds a little bit Dutch, is very important and not to be underestimated. The I strategy, which I have just referred to, must help to achieve this, of course. When I look back at the years that have passed, including the cooperation with the departments, I see that there have been real improvements. Because there are incidents on a regular basis, you don't really have to explain to anyone that this is something you have to invest in all the time. It's just keeping your security and defense in order, you might say. Then the very specific question about Webex. Because the government quickly switched to Webex's system based on the doubts about Zoom, the CIO Empire already carried out a national-wide analysis of the use of Webex in 2020. This allowed departments themselves to consider whether that system was appropriate for the activities they intended. This shows once again that you must be able to switch very quickly. Because of the platform we have created, we can and are in all departments people who know about such things and who can further strengthen each other. In that sense, in the light of what has just been said by the Prime Minister and the Minister of Finance, we have had the opportunity last year to really test digitization from the government. Otherwise it would probably never have come about this way, so large-scale. It's become one big social experiment that everyone had to take part in. So we have a wealth of experiences that we can use to make the government better. With all the shit we've been through last year, that's a bright spot. Finally, Mr President, I come to the questions about the real estate. Among others, Mr Snels asked about the Court's assessment of real estate management. His statement is that no priority is given to this. In recent years, the Defense Department has invested 800 million more in real estate. So there has been attention to the real estate. But what has come to light is that the problems are much bigger than just some money. This has led to such an interdepartmental policy investigation, an ibo, where it has been noted that there are three areas where real estate needs to be put in order in the Defense Department. First of all, it is very important that the basis is in order. That sounds very open-door, but of course it's important: knowing where you have real estate has a lot of real estate.................................................................................................................................. Secondly, the imbalance that exists now between the available budget and the huge amount of real estate must be restored. That means that at the moment, the Defense Department is in the process of looking at how we can get that balance back in order. Otherwise, no matter how much money you put in it, you will never get a structural balance that is also politically acceptable. Finally, it is recommended to adapt the current real estate system by gradually transferring the property to the RVB. This point is currently being examined and further discussed. I can say to Mr Snels that the benefit-burden system he introduced into the debate is not so much the solution to the problem that Defence is now facing. You can have a debate about it; the Court of Auditors has also had discussions about it before, I know from the time I was still in the Chamber. I myself brought this up myself, but it's a pretty big operation and maybe it's the wrong medicine for the problem that's happening right now. But we're talking to the Defense Department right now, I say as responsible for the National Real Estate Company, about how this could be solved. Mr Sneller, Mr Grinwis and Mrs Den Haan also asked questions about real estate management and the critical notes that were cracked by the Court of Auditors. They ask me how, from my responsibility for the real estate, I can make this go better. Maybe it's good to explain what that formal position is like right now. For the Defense Department, real estate is a prerequisite for operating. They need barracks, airports, ports to carry out their duties. That's why it's of strategic importance to the Defense to always be able to control that property. At the moment, Defense formally owns the real estate and also the planning when the maintenance takes place and the prioritization in it. Defense real estate is also on the Defense budget. From the National Real Estate Company we are actually the job company of Defense; we are hired to carry out that maintenance on the basis of the plans made by Defense. We get a budget for that and when that budget is up, maintenance stops, because we too have to answer for what we are doing. Now it is being considered, in consultation with the directors of Defense, whether you can do this smarter, for example in line with what we have already done in recent years in the integration of the Rijksbouwsdienst and the Rijksbouwgoedbedrijf, that Rijksbouwingssystem. That is a system that has proven itself by now, so you could think of a modality that could also be useful for the Defense Department. Because real estate is not really the core business for Defence; that is, of course, the defence and protection of the Dutch and NATO territories. At the same time, we are now in a situation of resignation. So we will continue with the preparations, but this could be a subject that comes before the next cabinet for decision-making. I think that is a good thing, too, when we look at the critical notes that the Court of Auditors is cracking on this issue. This also applies: no one needs to be convinced that this is a problem, because it is quite clear that it is a major problem. So that has to be solved. Finally, towards Mrs Den Haan. The working relationship with Defence and the RVB is excellent, just for the sake of completeness. That brings me to the end of my reply. I would like to congratulate the three Members of Parliament who gave their maiden speech, which I enjoyed very much, and wish them every success in their duties as MPs."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-06-17-tweedekamer-16.u202", "speech text": "Yes. Then I still have the headline: outside the EU. There was a question from Mr Sjoerdsma: it is time for closer defence cooperation in the European field and the Netherlands should specialise. A great deal has already been exchanged with the Minister of Defence during the 2020 budget debate. Motions have been adopted on scenarios for possible specialisation routes within international partnerships. We're looking at how defense task specialization can take place. The Secretary of Defense is preparing a letter, as I think Mr Sjoerdsma knows, to share it with the Chamber. At EU level, of course, we are looking at the PESCO and EDIDP/EDF projects. These are steps in this direction in areas where specialization may be desirable. There was a question from Mr Van Dijk about military cooperation in the EU. His position was that the EU has set up a European Defence Fund and a European Peace Facility in recent years. What does the Minister think of this militarisation of the EU? Well, a fund and a peace facility have been set up. European defence cooperation is a step towards making the EU more resilient in a rapidly changing world. It is also part of a core safety task. We just want the EU to be a little more on its own. An opinion has been issued by the AIV, which has been discussed with your Chamber. The AIV calls for steps to improve European defence cooperation. So I do not see this as a form of militarisation, but rather as a way of making better use of resources from the point of view of European self-employment and better functioning within NATO. The latter was discussed in the run-up to the NATO summit. Mrs Kamminga asked: what are the effects of the apparently stricter course towards China as a result of Biden's visit? I believe that the Prime Minister has already appointed a number of matters on this matter. The EU-US Summit was interesting. After that, I spoke to the trade negotiator, as Ambassador Tai called. I have stressed that we really welcome the cooperation, the like spirit, between the EU and the US towards China. We need to work together where possible and perhaps, as the Prime Minister has already appointed, we should also be able to discuss the differences where they exist. But, of course, we are allies in a broad sense. Of course, there are also competitive moments between the EU and the US, but we need to be able to discuss them. Agreements and a Trade and Technology Council have been announced by the EU and the US in the framework of technology, technology shielding and the preservation or strengthening of a technological edge. So it actually takes place in a triangle. We will continue to set our own course, no matter how good and no matter how bad that may go. There was also a question from Mrs Kamminga about how we look at more geopolitical commitment from OS funds or the neighbourhood policy. Countries such as Russia and China, of course, do this very ostentatiously. It's clear they're doing it and what quantities they're doing it with. The requirements package follows after the investment. We see that all the time at the Belt and Road Initiative. It's just a matter of concern; I want to recognize that. Many countries, both in Africa and countries that had originally signed the Belt and Road Initiative, are now coming back from that. Countries on the African continent have, of course, noticed that the cheque was easily signed. But the agreements and political or economic expectations were so great that people want to get out more often. This means that we must use our instruments to provide a credible, fast and effective alternative, but with our own conditionality in the areas of governance, rule of law, anti-corruption and human rights. That is often not so easy, because the easier, fast money is still often from China. That is a bit of the competition, the political struggle for values that we are also in."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-06-23-tweedekamer-3.u27", "speech text": "Yes. Then I'll go to the motion in part no. 54, member Kuzu. I supported this myself on behalf of the association with the municipality of The Hague. I honestly didn't know about the mayor's letter to anyone in the Empire. I'll ask the mayor who he sent that letter to. I will indeed contact you on this, because I fully agree with you that this is important. Of course, the main monument is in Poto\u010dari itself. Once every five years, a representative of the Dutch Government is present there. We have also invested substantially in the museum that is there. Members of parliament can go there on their journey and pay attention to it in their conversations. Of course, I am also talking to the Bosnian representatives and associations. This is important and it is also considered important. So I'll go after that. I can also leave the verdict on this motion to the Chamber. I think it's important that it gets there soon. The municipality of Rotterdam wants to make a financial contribution. That is what we discussed in the debate. The associations want to have it in The Hague and not in Rotterdam. I didn't know this was an obstacle, so I'll just pick it up. So I can also leave the judgement to the Chamber. I would like to conclude by hoping that many Members of Parliament will be present at the Square here in The Hague on 11 July, where the annual commemoration will take place. That's on a Sunday. Mr Kuzu also called for this in the debate. As a minister I started to be there, with the top of the defense, but also with the Dutchbat III veterans. I therefore hope that this year too, as Mr Kuzu called for in the committee debate, many Members of Parliament will be present. With that, I can end my answer."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-06-30-tweedekamer-6.u3", "speech text": "Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And also thanks to the Chamber, first of all for inviting me to be here again, I say right away, knowing that I have spent so many years in this Chamber, including in other ways. There were a number of Members of Parliament who indicated: why this debate at the moment? Mr Kwint said that Mr Bertema also made a comment. I can only inform you that I have received an invitation, and that, as it should of course, I am going to this House as a matter of urgency to take the defense on behalf of the cabinet of the bill that had already been submitted to you. So that's a choice of your room itself. I would also like to congratulate Mrs Paul. That was indeed a very nice maiden speech you made. And I wish you every happiness, and wisdom, in the important task you have been given in Parliament, in the most beautiful committee there is, as we often say to each other. Mr. Chairman. I have built up my answer as follows. I want to do it in three blocks. In the first block, I would like to highlight the importance of the legislative proposal, also in relation to promoting equality of opportunity. In the second, I would like to address the importance of the legislative proposal and the questions that have been asked about it when it comes to removing the bottlenecks that have arisen in the system. And in the third block, I would like to bring along a number of other questions, such as the question of how we dealt with an earlier amendment by Mr Bishop. But also a number of other questions I can take with me in this third block that have not gotten a spot in the first two. First of all, the first block. It is good, I think, to clarify for a very short time where we are at the end of the day, and why we are standing here with this bill. There was a very intensive debate in this Chamber in 2013 about what was called \"the final test.\" Very intensive. A number of Members of Parliament, at least Mr Beertema and Mr Van Meenen, were actively involved. At the end of the day, the Chamber finally turned the bill on its head, I say very domestically. That was under the previous cabinet. Through the Rog/Schouten, CDA and ChristenUnion amendment, which was supported by almost all political groups, except for the PVV, so all the other political groups supported that amendment. Suddenly there was a situation where there was a completely different legislative proposal, which eventually got a majority in this Chamber and, albeit not with those numbers, but with a majority in the First Chamber. A small detail: the PVV group did vote in favour of this bill, unlike in the House of Representatives, so consistency is mainly in the person of Mr Beertema. And that must also be said: it is always clear and clear about how it stands in it, unshakeable, in all the debates. That I do not agree with him in everything, may prove to be the case, but there is no misunderstanding about that. The bill finally came into force in 2014, and there has been a very comprehensive review. Oberon did. You've been given all these pieces. And two years ago, just before the summer recess, I think it was very much discussed with each other in a committee meeting room on a hot day. I indicated in the letter I had sent following the evaluation what bottlenecks we experienced in the implementation of the law as it had entered into force in 2014. I also submitted to the Chamber what I would like to change in the law. And I cannot help but note that all the points I have now mentioned in the law were finally accepted by the Chamber at the time, of: that is what needs to be done. And I did indeed start with the legislation before that. I made one exception at the time, and it was the VVD group in particular who put the finger on that very much, and that was that moment of notification: 1 May or 1 April. I have indicated this, and I shall come back to that separately later on, because there were some concerns about whether 1 May might still be possible, including the follow-up to follow-up to follow-up education. That performance test has also taken place, and you have just received it: 50 pages in which very detailed and detailed details are given as to what is, I would say, the possibilities and opportunities, or as they may be experienced in schools. That's not just from the p.o. and vo, but that is also from the sbo and special education. They have also given their reflection on this. They saw a lot of objections in particular. Mr. Chairman. The legislative proposal that we are debating today is therefore a result of very intensive discussions and debates with Parliament, whether or not it adopts motions and statements from the Chamber. Sometimes it was Mr Kwint's point, but still, a majority is a majority. You know that. Indeed, I have good reasons to do so. I'll be defending it in your direction later. That is how we got here and why this bill is in this form, with the support of your Chamber at the time. This is of course without prejudice to the fact that everyone has to make their own assessment. New Members of Parliament have also joined, or even new groups. But there can't really be any surprises for you about what we agreed at the time about what I would do. Mr. Chairman. In the course of the discussion at the time, we discussed very extensively what this does to ensure equal opportunities. That's coming back now. I understand that very well. By equal opportunities, of course, we mean that every child should be able to express the talents he or she has received and that we should be able to give everyone room for that. Those can be very different talents. We're not gonna put value judgments in that either. Some are very practical oriented, others are a bit more theoretical. Some have a combination of both, by the way. In the development of children to adulthood, we try to discover what the talents are, which is the most beautiful thing there is; it's so fascinating, and we want to give children opportunities to develop those talents further, in education and, of course, beyond. Then we will see in practice, both in education and outside education, because you also know that this is a multifaceted monster that can be attributed not only to education but sometimes to certain children, but not to all. We all have jargon for that in education, but especially children from a low SES, we know, do not always end up in the place where they might actually end up in view of their content. It is a task for all of us, a sacred task, not only for policy makers but also for the people in practice, to take care of it. Of course, in this legislative proposal we can never solve the whole problem of inequality of opportunity, or whatever you want to call it. It's really an illusion if someone thinks that a bill can deal with that. However, this does not mean that legislation does not matter and that legislation on this subject, the way in which the primary school period, primary education, is completed and the transition to continuing education, cannot contribute to this. The evaluation made it clear that there were a number of very concrete bottlenecks that we can also do something about. Most of you have supported the first point widely, namely that there are going to be two login moments when you make an adjustment take place, or at least offer the space for an adjustment. We know that at least about 2,000 children a year do not end up in the right place for that reason. I thought Mrs Paul indicated that, if you have a review of the school advice, you have a seven times greater chance of not being on the spot or at the level, or sometimes literally not at the school, where you would like to go. We have said this together: we do not like it; we are going to do something about it. We'll take care of that in this law. I think it is a very important point of profit that this is simply laid down in legislation. We then talked about the moment of application. I have just said something about this, for an introduction. I have asked you for room to take a comprehensive execution test, as to what could be the most appropriate time. And then not: what would you like? But: what is practical? I sent you that test; I thought it was in December. It was part of that extensive package of pieces that you received at the time. It turned out that when it comes to wishes, it is very diverse, but that a very large group said that it could be March or early April. In short, there were several wishes that arose from that. But when it came to feasibility, it emerged that if we were to hold on to 1 May, which was our intention in the first instance, this could cause problems in practice for schools, especially for special schools but also for other schools, in drawing up the formation and approving it by the Mr. In short, they wanted to have a little more clarity rather in order to be able to organise education properly for the period after the holiday. From the p.o. It was very clearly stated that there was also a commitment to a good deadline for the transfer of pupils, for a warm transfer. A large part of the schools saw problems when that would happen later. You know that as far as 1 May is concerned, there is a holiday period which usually ends 7 May, after the commemoration of 5 May. So we actually had too little time to do so in a good way. The study, which you have also had and which I think you have read, also showed that parents also want to have clarity in time about which school their child can go to and what level their child can go to. If that clarity comes late and it's not the clarity you want, it's also more complicated to find a place somewhere else. That has ultimately been the consideration of choosing the date of 1 April, where you know that we are a week ahead of it. We have had the discussion about what that will do with the subsequent education period before. You know it's been investigated, too. First of all: do we make the test very big? We do not want that, and I do not think anyone in this Chamber, perhaps with a single exception, will like a kind of closure. The test is simply that second objective fact, also in relation to an opinion given and ultimately also a final opinion for placement in secondary education. Research that we have done and which have also been sent to you shows that the purchase advancer does not go at the expense and has to go at the expense of completing the teaching time. Reasoning from the professionals who do their work in the school, I even think that it is almost a bit an insult to them if we assume that once the test has been taken, nothing will happen in their classroom with their students and the teachers who bear responsibility for it. So considering everything, we chose this date. Know that I am promoting that good agreements are made between primary and secondary schools when it comes to the transfer. This can also include what can still be addressed in the weeks towards the transition to secondary education, which can also further promote and manage this transition. This is already a way in which many schools work, but that is not yet the case everywhere. It is, of course, always important to promote this wherever possible. So this is what we settle with each other when it comes to that login date. Indeed, I think it is very good that we are now laying this down in the law."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-06-30-tweedekamer-7.u2", "speech text": "Mr. Chairman. \"We're done with DOD, and that's too bad, because we've worked there our whole lives.\" That is what a number of participants said last week at a hearing on the subject we are discussing this afternoon, namely working with chromium-6 paints. A life-threatening substance, carcinogen, that thousands of defense personnel have been working with over the past few decades. The Secretary of State has had extensive research on this by RIVM. The SP has also investigated it twice: I myself as a former spokesperson and now again as a spokesperson and my predecessor, Mrs Karabulut. Two publications are also available on the SP website. That hearing last week was very impressive, as was the meeting we just had. The Secretary of State was kind enough to be there as well. I appreciate that very much. There are currently about 20 former defence officers sitting at the Square in a room watching this debate. They are very involved and have the Secretary of State put the fire to the wind. I couldn't do better myself and ask her to please make a proper arrangement. If you go into this subject, you won't get away from the comparison with the supplement scandal. People have also been crushed by the government. The D.O.D. knew chrome-6 paints were dangerous, but they didn't say that. There are countless examples of leaders in the Defense Department who allowed their people, who are now on the Square, to work with this substance and did not say that this was dangerous. A painful example: then there were Americans who were American depots where they worked and they wore the best suits and had the best materials. Then the Dutch employees asked: why can't I get a suit like that? Then the supervisor said, \"You can keep your mouth shut, and if you open your mouth again, you can leave. There's the door. You should be glad you got a job. Go get a mouth cap at the hardware store.\" That cost 2.5 guilders at the time. It's really too scandalous for words, and it makes you quiet. One of the employees made a very sharp comparison and said: suppose you buy a car at the garage, which is said to be in good condition. You're gonna find out the brakes are broken and you're gonna hit a tree. Then we'll be furious at that garage owner and we'll sue him. My question to the Secretary of State is: why don't we do that to the Defense Department, if there were leaders who knowingly put their people in danger? What's the difference? What struck me, also in the meeting just now, is that people say: it is very good that chromium-6 has been looked at, but there are many more substances dangerous. There are even 5,000 dangerous substances that DOD used to work with, such as benzene. You have seen the examples. These people quite rightly want that to be looked at as well. I'm asking the Secretary of State if there's any way to investigate that. There are two problems with the present compensation scheme created by the Secretary of State. Firstly, the burden of proof. It's still very painful that you, as a former employee, have to prove that you've worked with these substances for years and that the DOD still has the room to say, \"Yes, but we don't think that's convincing. Your illness isn't on the list, so you won't get compensation.\" I find that very painful, and I think that the DOD should be generous with the compensation. The second point is the height. The fee is called a tip by many people. It's about a few thousand euros. They say, \"That comes down to 50 cents a day.\" Can't it go up? Make a generous damages fund, because these people are fucked up like crazy."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-06-30-tweedekamer-7.u4", "speech text": "Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I also speak for the PvdA. It was already known that Defense personnel had been exposed to the danger of chromium-6. Research carried out by RIVM now shows that there may have been exposure to chromium-6 at all Defence sites, and not to a limited number, as was previously reported. People who worked at the Department of Defense between 1975 and 2015 are 850,000 people who have to fear for their health if they have had to work without protective equipment. RIVM says that's roughly half of it. That fear affects a human being. The list of conditions that you may experience due to exposure to chromium-6 is spicy. Diseases like cancer can turn up years later. It must live with that fear alone is in itself a form of injustice that has been done to these people. GroenLinks and the PvdA have therefore long been critical of the benefit scheme for former defence workers exposed to chromium-6. Unlike the regulations drawn up by the municipality of Tilburg and the NS for municipal workers who are also exposed to chromium-6, the Ministry of Defence does not pay a penny until someone has actually become ill. In doing so, the DOD denies that the health concerns of this group of people are already suffering in themselves. Why is the Secretary of State not prepared to pay \u20ac7,000 net to anyone who has had to work with chromium-6 without adequate protection? In addition, we are critical of the compensation for material damage if a disease is caused by working with chromium-6. Defense then pays \u20ac3,750, regardless of the actual costs and lost income that apply to this victim. If victims have more damage, they should go to court, it's defense's attitude. As far as GroenLinks and the PvdA are concerned, that attitude is not acceptable. Defense has fully consciously exposed employees to infectious agents. An employer with good decency should then bear all disease-related costs and should not get rid of them with a reference to the court. Then why does the Secretary of State choose this? Some former employees of the Defense Department have now died of the consequences of working with chromium-6. For them, the benefit scheme is too late. GroenLinks and the PvdA have difficulty with how the next of kin are treated. They cannot claim most of the compensation, i.e. for intangible damage. They only receive \u20ac3,750 in material compensation plus compensation for the funeral. With this, the Defense Department seems to ignore the intangible suffering of the next of kin. In a previous letter, the State Secretary states that opening up the benefit for intangible damage to survivors would lead to far-reaching precedents. I would ask the Secretary of State to go into that again. Why is creating a precedent so undesirable? What is wrong with the precedent to compensate survivors of employees who have died as a result of the government for intangible damage? Finally. The civilisation of a government can be read out in the way it deals with people she has suffered. The supplementing affair \"the SP' referred to there as well as \"the SP' is a great test of competence, but chromium-6 doesn't do much for it. It is only when the government shows its willingness to pay generously for suffering that we can give people the confidence that there can be no repetition in the future. Thank you."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-06-30-tweedekamer-7.u6", "speech text": "Mr. Chairman. No regulation and no amount of money can remove the suffering of the chromium-6 victims or their next of kin. The VVD therefore considers it right that they now have a system that is easily accessible and that does not impose unnecessary procedures on the victims with regard to the taking of evidence. Whoever has worked with chromium-6 and has a disease that is causally related to it is eligible. It is valuable that, together with former employees, lawyers, trade unions and independent scientific researchers of the RIVM, DOD has worked hard on a quick, joint solution for former employees, based on the Dutch injury compensation law. The VVD attaches great importance to the fact that some of the RIVM's assumptions have worked in favour of a quick handling for employees. The victims have already suffered too much, and in the previous mode of action, the Defense seemed to have the military employability prevail over health. That's a way of doing things that, looking back, didn't fit the defense. The safety of the staff must be paramount. This is not only a question of good weapons, good practice and good equipment, but also a question of good protection, of security awareness in the way of working. I'll get back to you on that. And it's also a question of education, for example via e-learning that you can easily consult, rather than large, thick, illegible manuals. Unfortunately, I have heard stories about such manuals. A similar pragmatic approach and collective regulation could also be followed for other major occupational diseases. In doing so, of course, everyone remains free to make additional claims."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-06-30-tweedekamer-7.u35", "speech text": "Thank you, Mr President. Many defence workers have in the past come into contact with chromium-6, a rust-resistant substance that was added to certain types of paint. The health damage caused by the toxic chromium-6 by many defense workers is really enormous and ranges from stomach cancer to asthma. Although this problem has been going on for decades, chromium-6 victims are still in the process of getting recognition and compensation. They really need to be dragged out from behind the hellhole doors. There is now a research report from the RIVM showing that personnel across the Defence Organisation have been at risk of exposure to chromium-6, while previously only five sites have been targeted. Another crucial finding is that health problems can occur in more function groups than was thought. Think, for example, of drivers and cleaners who were also at risk. This simply means that there are more chrome-6 victims than the ones that have been done justice to so far. So many of those victims or their next of kin who felt like they were in the reeds were just right. Mr. Chairman. It is really high time that all the mistakes made were corrected now. Although the cabinet adjusts the benefit scheme, it is still not doing enough. This is partly due to the fact that people are walking around with symptoms that are not directly associated with chromium-6. I have just said it in an interrupting debate: Defence works with a pre-cooked list of RIVM, which only contains diseases where a causal link to exposure to chromium-6 has already been scientifically demonstrated. This is a very unfair point, because there are, of course, symptoms that are not on that list, but which certainly cannot be ruled out as being caused by chromium-6. I have just mentioned the example of the serious disease of larynx cancer. Until recently, it has never been recognised that this disease may be caused by chromium-6, but it is now clear that there is a link. This shows that the pre-cooked list of RIVM is not satisfactory and is a bad starting point. After all, scientific insight only comes with the years. By the way, we know that RIVM does not always have the wisdom. Mr. Chairman. All in all, it is simply unacceptable that the cabinet should leave sick people exposed to chromium-6 in the cold. They have to hope that their condition will be on that RIVM list one day. Probably in many cases it's too late and they're dead. Until then, until that disease is on the RIVM list, there will simply be no satisfaction. Well, after all these years, that cynical cannot be dealt with with by the chrome-6 victims or their next of kin. It goes without saying that there must be a reverse burden of proof here. I really think everyone should agree on that. If someone is exposed to chromium-6 and has had health problems, it must be proven that those complaints were not caused by chromium-6. If this is not the case, it must be assumed that chromium-6 has caused the complaints and, of course, a proper compensation must be paid in order to do so. Mr. Chairman. Finally, I have a question about height. The pain money varies, I say it out of my head and lies between \u20ac5,000 and, up to, \u20ac40,000. What's that based on? I also think that on the low side, although I understand that health damage or even death can of course never be linked to an amount. But why was this scope chosen? The PVV thinks that's low. Mr President, concluding. The injustice of chromium-6 must now be resolved once and for all. It is a very expensive duty of the cabinet to ensure that."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-06-30-tweedekamer-7.u39", "speech text": "Mr. Chairman. The suffering that chrome-6 has caused for defense personnel is terrible. And it is also right that the Secretary of State has apologized on behalf of the Defense Department. It's also nice that the RIVM research has finally been completed. Unfortunately, some of the victims have already died. It is too late for them, and that is indigestible. The CDA supports the cabinet response on the basis of the Committee's recommendations. At the same time, we also realise that no regulation will do anything right. However, we still have a number of questions and comments. The round table showed that RIVM had no contact with other countries where chromium-6 is also used. Does the DOD have any contact with other countries? I can well imagine that these countries also have the same problems, and it would therefore be wise, but also a moral obligation to foreign defence personnel, to proactively share our knowledge and experience in this area. What is the state secretary's position in this, and how do other countries deal with this at the moment? It is also good that the list of diseases is dynamic. We are again making an additional plea to stay on top of this, because time for many victims with a disease not yet on the list, for example, is their enemy. And let us, in doubt, say again, I think that this task lies with science as a political coulant with the addition of new diseases. Finally. My colleague Van Dijk has already asked the question: what about other substances? This was also a subject that came on the table several times, especially at the round table. Is this being dealt with proactively, or are we waiting for a new 'professional disease'? Finally, thanks to the Secretary of State, and let us avoid having to deal with this situation more often in the future."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-06-30-tweedekamer-7.u53", "speech text": "Yes, Mr. Chairman. I'll take a look. I think I've already answered some of the questions. Mrs Van Beuker asked how many employees have reported. I have the exact figures in front of me. 4,300 people registered at the Chrome-6 Information Point. Of these, 347 POMS have applied within the benefit scheme, of which 201 have been awarded. The current scheme, which has also been opened to non-POMS employees, has so far involved 400 employees. So that's 400 employees from all defense locations. That was him, Mr. Chairman."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-06-30-tweedekamer-7.u54", "speech text": "First of all, I would like to express my appreciation for the position of the Secretary of State. I am pleased that she has been to the hall and that she has been to Kerkrade before. She's showing herself and she's not running away from the victims. That deserves a compliment. But now the policy, because there are still a few questions to ask. That certainly applies to the latter. The figures show that only a few hundred people actually received compensation. I read somewhere that this is 4.2 million euros. That's not a lard. That's a clear amount if you look at the total defense budget. Then I think that the Secretary of State can do a little more work to better guide people who are just outside the scheme. That is my firm conviction. Mr Fritsma gave good examples of people who do have phenomena, but from whom the RIVM or the counter says: no, you are excluded. I ask the Secretary of State if there is room for her to look at the people who said to you this afternoon: we do not fit exactly in the street of RIVM, but we are sick. Can you do more for that?"}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-06-30-tweedekamer-7.u68", "speech text": "An individual claim is not a lawsuit. I want to avoid that misunderstanding, because Mrs Bromet said it too. Lots of defense claims... I believe I can now count on one hand how many cases there are in a court of law. So the fact that you file an individual claim doesn't mean you're going to court. That means it's only when you disagree with the DOD, and if it turns out you don't get out with the DOD about the claim you filed that you're appealing to the damage you've suffered. Those are the intangible damage and the material damage. So a claim is something other than a hallway to court. I really want to take that image away from Mr Fritsma. A claim is intended precisely to look at your individual situation, to assess what work has been done and what you may be exposed to and to then assess whether you can be compensated for the fact that you have suffered damage, material and intangible. That's not a courtroom hallway. It's an individual assessment."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-07-01-tweedekamer-4.u18", "speech text": "Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Since the introduction of the lockdown, a lot has been demonstrated, understandably, against the unlawful and freedom-limiting corona measures. Unfortunately, in many cases these demonstrations were brutally ended by the riot police. Peaceful protesters were stormed, with fire cannons scattered and once they were defenseless on the ground lay still extensively battered by groups of ME'ers. It is worrying that the Minister called this mode of action \"appropriate' during the debate. Mr. Chairman. I cannot, of course, be satisfied with this if the Minister does not take this enormous problem seriously. Then the Chamber must investigate itself. That's why I'm filing the next motion. [[Motion]] [[The Chamber,]] [[heard the debate,]] [[Considering that various opposition demonstrations against the corona measures have been terminated by order of the authority, using gross force against peaceful demonstrators;]] [[noting that the government has shown that it does not wish to properly investigate the violence against defenceless citizens;]] [[whereas, in a rule of law, violence against peaceful citizens, who do not commit disturbances, is unacceptable;]] [[calls on the Bureau to prepare a proposal for a parliamentary examination of the manner in which these demonstrations are conducted,]] [[and goes to the order of the day.]] [[This motion has been proposed by Mr Van Meijeren.]] [[She's getting No. kst-29628-1029]]"}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-07-06-eerstekamer-10.u11", "speech text": "I think you have to weigh administrative clarity against the wishes of the residents. That is also always of enormous importance. In the Netherlands, we have self-government at local level in municipalities. If the majority of the inhabitants say in a referendum that they want to belong to a particular municipality, even if they hardly limit it or not at all, that is a clear mandate and a wish of the inhabitants. That's a big good, I think. I think that is not sufficiently taken into account here, whereas we have just seen that a division of a municipality into four other municipalities without any hassle is fine. I mentioned the example of Haaren in Brabant. We now have the experience of doing this. Mr. Chairman. We must also feel strengthened by the recent outcome of the referendum in the nearby Grave. People there, with a clear majority, elected democratically through a referendum to join the country of Cuijk. It is now. So the people can consult instead of the forced country they didn't choose. It is a victory for democracy which, as far as we are concerned, tastes like more. Why, with the examples of Haaren and Grave, should we persist in a rearguard fight, as it goes in Lander? My explanation is: because it has been going on for so long; we have been at it for so long. It's an act of exhaustion. Let's act as a senate for that. Mr. Chairman. I also think it is appropriate to dwell here on the embarrassment that took place on the other side of the Binnenhof, in the House of Representatives. A hearing was held there in the run-up to this legal process. That hearing didn't go through because of corona measures and didn't take place anymore. Next, MPs \u00d6z\u00fctok van GroenLinks and Van der Molen of the CDA wrote an amendment, an amendment to add Schaijk to Oss. That is also a regentesque intervention, because then you decide again rather than with the population. This does not do justice to the inhabitants of Schaijk who may wish to join Uden. The announcement of this amendment struck in Landerd like a bomb from the pendulum arm. Then invisible polemics arose for the public in the well-known back rooms. The initiators of the amendment in the House of Representatives had to get the tarpaulin. The amendment went off the table and there was a compromise in place. It was an ill-thought-out compromise, a monstrous compromise, I would say. That is the external evaluation in the spring of 2024, which should consider whether the new merged municipality of Maashorst can continue to exist, as provided for in this law............................................................................................................................................................................................. Of course, this is a faux pass. You wonder where the renowned Menno van Coehoorn is to cast the ingenious defense work that the residents of this congregation deserve. If this continues, we will enter into an uncertain fusion trajectory with an external evaluation in 2024 that hangs like the sword of Damocles over the new fusion community. Let's say it doesn't work after all. Then the administrative suffering and the consequences can't be overseen, can they? Furthermore, how reliable is this evaluation? Will there be a referendum later? Or is the weather going through festivals and through vision formation? Isn't that extremely susceptible to influence by politics and government? I therefore appeal to my fellow Members: come on, senate, we must put a stop to this. How seriously do we take the assessment of merger plans as First Chamber of the States-General if we do not intervene here? We have to take responsibility. There are two options here, as far as we are concerned. Option 1 is voting against this bill next week, and then back to the drawing board. Option 2 is to hold this bill until a valid referendum has taken place. If it comes out that the majority of Schaijk and Reek want to be joined by Uden, then the bill can continue. If not, we can do something else just like Grave. For the time being, we opt for option 2: Hold on. The roadmap is simple. reclassification elections are scheduled for November and local elections will take place in March 2022. In a complex world like ours, organizing a valid, binding referendum per core, if necessary a two-stage, really a piece of cake. The current municipalities should be able to do a great deal of work, especially if they get some extra financial support from the minister. Mr. Chairman. The Landerd region is familiar with long-term battles in which the decision ultimately fell through a political decision, such as the siege of Grave, which I started with. The French were not defeated there in 1674, despite the force majeure of forces on the Dutch side. They capitulated under very favourable conditions, because the French king Louis XIV had decided that. Let us as a senate also make the right historical decision for Landerd next week and not agree to this merger law. Thank you."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-07-07-tweedekamer-10.u303", "speech text": "Then I would like to put another question to the Secretary of State. It was set in the first term, but I was already through the interruptions. I did not want to have another fight with our chairman, which sometimes happens in heated debates. So I let him go. But I've submitted that there are still people in court who run lawsuits under that code 1043, where the Tax Administration then writes whole defenses. That really haunts people, because people read in it \"that's what the government thinks about me.\" And we know that code 1043 really comes from the wrong line. Just before the trial, a day before the trial, the Tax Administration withdraws and acknowledges that there is a failure. This mechanism is therefore still in place. I can very well imagine that the Secretary of State will not be able to respond to this in the second period. But I would like you to discuss this with Secretary of State Vijlbrief, and that it really is looked at: what legal cases are still going on and how does the Tax Administration stand up to these kinds of codes and these kinds of situations? I don't want people still feeling so devastated by that same Tax Administration right now. I hope that she will be able to inform us of this before the end of the recess. On the one hand, we are building up a recovery operation, and that is difficult enough, and that is what we have been talking about, but on the other hand, the same mechanism is going on. And there should also be a change in that."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-07-07-tweedekamer-8.u2", "speech text": "Yes, unorthodox rise and fight injustice. That's what Peter R. de Vries has done in recent years. I really hope from the bottom of my heart that we will see that much longer. I wish him and his next of kin... \"Next guys,\" I say! I wish him and his family all the strength at this difficult time and I wish everyone who assists him. The unprecedented injustice we are talking about today is also an attack on the rule of law. A lot of people were thrown into deep misery by our own government. Yesterday we received a report showing that the stamp \"frauder\" was given to remove work stocks administratively. And then there are people who dare to say: Parliament wanted this. For years, this was the image: it was requested by parliament. A settlement culture would have arisen in The Hague, says former Minister Dijsselbloem. Does the Prime Minister agree? I had a debate with him on the job carousel. He didn't want me to say that. If something went wrong, the cabinet would solve it and we wouldn't hear from them. But how can he explain that all the people who were heard before the interrogation committee, under oath, are still in the saddle high and dry? That's not a face, is it? Does the Prime Minister agree? It goes on and on. There has been a brave gentleman who has stepped forward and said: I have been dealt with under the stamp of fraud \"code 1043.\" He was gonna be in court this week against the IRS. The IRS has written a statement of defense of hundreds of pages. That's what's going on. Hundreds of pages from a government agency about you being a fraud. And now he's being told right before the trial that there's been an official complaint. The IRS recognizes guilt and the trial is off. But why is this still going on? Can the Minister of Finance, together with the Secretary of State, explain clearly what they have done in the policy of stopping the legal attack on individuals, which crushes people? Is it true that the CAF team still exists, even if that would stop? Is it true that Supplements still send letters, even recently, to people that they have to pay back everything if they do not send their annual statement of childcare very quickly? Why is it still that language? People are getting cold around the heart. You scare the shit out of them. Does the Secretary of State agree with the lawyer Besselink that the all-or-nothing approach \"You have to repay everything in case of a mistake or in case of over-received debt instruments\" is not meant anywhere and is not included in the Childcare Payment Act or in the Awir? If on 22 June 2014 the MPs who received an e-mail from Kristel de Waal were the spokesperson child care of the Labour Party, D66, the SP and GroenLinks, including yourself, chairman of the committee, would have been interested in the question why on earth people had to pay \u20ac150,000 back to Surcharges, then the world would have looked really different for families. A lot of kids would have been saved. GroenLinks and the SP did ask parliamentary questions, but they were answered incompletely. It was said by the then Minister of Social Affairs: I can inform you in confidence about what is going on with these parents. What was in that confidential information? Did that come from the IRS? Kristel de Waal has been compensated, just like Kristie Rongen and Nazmiye. They all checked in back then. It was then 50 parents who told their story. If then doors had opened, if then had been listened, then their children would not have been so damaged, nor would they have been so damaged. I know that the Prime Minister, but also the Secretary of State and the Minister, spoke specifically with these three parents. And I was so curious: are they still in touch with them? Do they ever inform these parents about what's going on in life, how hard it is to pick up the life they run into? I'd like to hear how the Prime Minister is fulfilling his commitment to these parents. We see a pattern of loss of human size in automatic processes in which people are completely ground. The chairman of the parliamentary interrogation committee asked everyone to look in the mirror. Did the government do the same? Are people facing problems now face personal and human? Are the appeals and appeals now humanized? Are people gonna get a call? I'm afraid the worst, with a look at my mailbox. It is not just about the Tax Administration; it is also about the UWV, about municipalities... And did the room look in the mirror? Did you look in the mirror, I say to my colleagues. If the SP's parliamentary questions had been taken seriously, this would not have happened. The same goes for my black book, in which I said: set-up/great debt is a big problem. That just fell into dead sand at first. No other MP was really interested in what was there. So yesterday we received that report which states that it was done of its own motion to eliminate work stocks. I can't get it out of my mouth. The supplemental scandal is not an incident. It is because of the human image that prevails in the political and administrative direction of our country. I call the elite one, too. They look down on people who are not successful in their eyes. If you're a loser who needs a supplement or a benefit to make a living, then you're actually a profiteer, aren't you? Then you need to be checked. Then you're actually a fraud. This is how all our social provisions are set up. That's how judges looked at people. Does the Prime Minister recognize this? If he does not want to laugh at this one time, I would like to ask. In the Ministerial Committee on Fraud, under the leadership of this Prime Minister, it was decided in 2014 to share massive data from people who were at risk, people who had allowances, people who had benefits. In the preparatory paper for that ministerial committee on fraud, it was stated that nationality is an indicator of fraud. Does the government still think so? Mr. Chairman. The fish is gonna rot in the head. This Prime Minister was responsible for driving fraud policy forward in social laws and later in the government as a whole. I wish we could see something new, but that starts with recognition. Does the Prime Minister recognize that? Does the Prime Minister recognise that if the rule of law is not for everyone, then he does not exist? I would like to make two more points. I'm gonna try and walk through it as best I can. The Committee of Inquiry has not been given easy information. The President made that very clear. It's also in the report. I would like to ask the Secretary of State: if she looks at it now, how did it go? Is it true that the interrogation committee has had to reclaim several times, because attachments to e-mails were not provided automatically? And is it also true that this was especially the case with all the e-mails that were about that crisis month in 2019, of which Uijlenbroek, the then Director-General of the Tax Administration, said it existed to save the State Secretary and not to tell the truth? Why did RTL and Trouw's requests for the documents that deal with them never get motivated? That sounds procedural, but it is very substantive. Those documents show that there were already compensation plans in 2017. If those compensation plans had been implemented in 2017, we wouldn't be here right now. Then those lives wouldn't have gone off the rails like that. I have great doubts whether the Committee of Inquiry has received all the documents it asked for. We requested everything about the Palmen report, but that mail about not archiving, which was also about two or three weeks ago, did not come to us. As a result of that second-term doubt, I will table a motion to have a parliamentary lawyer look into whether the POK got everything. This can be done on the basis of all the documents made public, because during our interviews and during the weekend before we presented our report, all kinds of documents were made public that had been requested by journalists by appealing to the Wob. And what I find very strange, and I would particularly like to ask the Minister, who unfortunately is not here, but he will undoubtedly listen: why isn't there a single text or app in it from him? I know they are there, because I apprehended him on this matter. And that's so weird that you're on a parliamentary interrogation committee, and you know it's there because we've advanced it, but it's not there. Finally, Mr President. Many people rightly praise Eva Gonz\u00e1lez P\u00e9rez, a passionate lawyer for her clients. There is also much fame for the journalists of RTL and Trouw, who kept asking. And MPs who did their jobs were also complimented. There has been a whole debate on administrative law, on the drafting of judges, on how they judge residents when they are opposed to public services. But one person is really always unlisted, and that's the employee of the Objection Charges Department. He saw that the Tax Administration did not bring all the documents into the justice cases of the minister that were dealt with under CAF 11. And he made sure that those documents were added to the file in court, which allowed it to be used, and the lawyer won the cases. This employee then started a case by the then Director General of the Tax Administration, because he said this would be a leak. A criminal expedition against the employee who told the truth. This is what we found out as a room. And two years ago in the debate, I can remember very well. We demanded from Menno Snel that he stop doing so, with that witch hunt on this whistleblower............................................................................................................................................................................................................................................ It has been corrected, but I would like to ask the Secretary of State, but also the Prime Minister: has this man received any compliments, a flower, an official letter of thanks for his contribution to the rule of law? Did this civil servant, who has served faithfully for years to the Tax Office, even get a proper goodbye when he retired? Thank you, Mr. Chairman."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-09-08-tweedekamer-7.u92", "speech text": "Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In 2019, the European anti-corruption watchdog GRECO hit the Netherlands. We are not sufficiently protected from corruption and are lagging behind in ensuring our political integrity. GRECO listed 16 recommendations. The Netherlands has not yet adopted any recommendation. How is that possible? There is hardly any regulation of lobbying practices. There is no cooling-off period for directors, something that former Minister Van Nieuwenhuizen gratefully took advantage of. And who is actually funding the political parties? The premium affair, the 'function elsewhere' debacle, a doubling of the number of incidents in which the Chamber is incompletely informed: it cannot continue to do so. Mr President, we can see in all these incidents that the same pattern is constantly emerging. Every time the cabinet searches or crosses the borders and the Chamber wants to hold those involved to account, the cabinet makes a retreating movement. Then a new incident occurs and the pattern repeats itself. It is a pattern where the incident around the double functions fits seamlessly. Shouldn't the Cabinet have involved the Chamber immediately? As far as we are concerned, the Constitution is clear about the dual functions. You can't wear both the head of government and the MP's hat. Of course with the one unless. The purpose of the law is to protect the trias politicians and the rule of law. Where were the three rulers at the time of the discussion? The social outrage was so great. Then why did it stay so quiet from the cabinet, I ask our Prime Minister. Unfortunately, neither did we as a Chamber. Mr. Chairman. What the state scholars, the Chamber and society agree on is that we should no longer want double positions, such as those of the three Secretary of State. My question to the President is therefore: why has the President not referred the appointment of the State Secretary to the Chamber for assessment? Let us set a limit here as a Chamber. Let us make it clear that this is the border and that it can no longer be crossed. Mr President, allow me to say a few words about the lobby phenomenon. We are also failing in this respect. For example, state law professor Bovend'Eert mentions the Dutch lobby register as nothing more than a bummer and the Netherlands is the only country in Europe that does not have any kind of control over the lobby. When is the Prime Minister going to take these signals seriously? Fortunately, the EU has enough good examples: a mandatory lobby register, a two-year cooling-off period for directors. Why hasn't the Prime Minister done anything about it yet? Why so indifferent? Finally, everything of value is defenseless. That certainly applies to our democracy. The findings of the GRECO should be carried out. Today, as a Chamber, we can speak out against the unnecessary duplication of functions in this Chamber. Thank you."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-09-08-tweedekamer-7.u93", "speech text": "Everything of value is defenseless. Mr Dassen asks a very good question: who is funding our political parties? That is clear for Volt Europe. That's Mr. Soros. He wired $23,600 to Volt Europe. Is that right?"}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-09-09-tweedekamer-8.u95", "speech text": "Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Charlie Hebdo, Paris 2015. Daphne Caruana Galizia, Malta 2017. J\u00e1n Kuciak, Slovakia 2019. Giorgos Karaivaz, Athens 2021. Peter R. de Vries, Amsterdam 2021. In four years, four journalists have died in Europe from attacks. What do they have in common? They did research and challenged power, whether it was political power or organized crime. They looked critically at society. In the Netherlands, we see the existence of independent journalism as a matter of course. Unfortunately, nothing less is true. The Netherlands is also not immune to the growing pressure on press freedom caused by fake news, opposition and intimidation. We've been dropping in the World Press Freedom Index for the third year in a row. If we allow this undermining of independent journalism, we are complicit in undermining the rule of law. So we have to break this pattern. Mr. Chairman. Everything of value is defenseless. To protect our democracy, we must protect journalists. It's sad that we had to get to this point. Critical journalists should not need the protection of politics. On the contrary, they must be free to set political fires as an independent force. That is why we need structural solutions to strengthen the position of journalists. The foundations of our rule of law must be strengthened so that they cannot be affected, so that any change of power is separate from the protection of independent journalism. That is why I would like to ask the Minister: how does the Minister view this, also in the light of the action plan for European democracy, which shows that freedom of the press, media pluralism and the fight against fake news are important elements for ensuring a democratic society? This is also a cross-border problem. We need to address this not only at national level, but also at European level. What is the Minister's commitment to this at European level? Mr. Chairman. Imagine having an autocratic government in the Netherlands one day. Have we provided sufficient guarantees in the Netherlands? The research of Reporters Without Borders shows that this is not the case in the Netherlands. What solutions does the Minister see for this? What steps are being taken to prevent the privacy and sources of journalists from being protected by NCTV? Does the Minister intend to introduce legislation to prevent strategic lawsuits against public organisations, including journalists? And how is it ensured that media have sufficient access to independent grants and financial support? Mr. Chairman. That doesn't mean we're here yet. A resilient society requires well-informed citizens, as well as good investigative journalism. Is the Minister therefore planning, in cooperation with his colleagues, to come up with a plan such as in Finland, where education is offered on the recognition of fake news, the prevention of wrong information and the recognition of quality and reliable media? Mr. Chairman. These structural solutions are needed to protect journalism and the rule of law in the long term, but we all note that it is already unsafe. Whether online or offline, threats, aggression and violence must never go unpunished. Something needs to be done right away. In the Scandinavian countries, freedom of the press is better served by systematic action against intimidation. What is the Minister's position on a regional police point where journalists can go? That's been asked before today. Is the Minister considering a rapid digital warning mechanism for infringements of the freedom of the press? Has this been investigated, for example? Mr. Chairman. We don't want to go without critical journalism. We need people who challenge power and ask uncomfortable questions, whether they be journalists, theatre makers or filmmakers. I'm talking about people who let us look at society in other ways. They are the guardians of democracy. We have to do everything we can to stand up for them. Thank you."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-09-14-eerstekamer-5.u207", "speech text": "Well, a little self-defense does wonders, I can tell you."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-09-15-tweedekamer-8.u309", "speech text": "I will come back to the evacuation of the embassy and everything in that regard, the careful consultation that has taken place over a very long period of time, certainly already done by my colleague, Minister Blok, former Foreign Minister, and the follow-up we have wanted to give to it. But this is not a defense; this is an explanation of how things could have gone so wrong in the end. If I note that other countries, most of Europe and even the Americans themselves, have been overwhelmed on the basis of false assumptions, then that is not an excuse, but a sad observation. It is also something I deeply regret and regret. But it's the hard reality. It's not a defense. It is, I think, an explanation. We can support that, too. In the international comparison requested by Mr Van Wijngaarden, you can see that France, for example, has started evacuations a little earlier, but still has 11,000 people to get out of Afghanistan. Germany, with a much larger presence. The United Kingdom. We can simply provide these figures, but I think it would be better for this to be independently tested and supported. It's not a defense. It's horrible, but unfortunately it's the way it is. Mistakes have been made on the basis of false assumptions. We can't turn back the clock."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-09-15-tweedekamer-8.u315", "speech text": "I don't know if there are a few things that are mixed up here. Mrs Simons said the Chamber has been asking for evacuation plans for years. The Belhaj motion was adopted in the middle of the crisis, I believe on 17 August. We've been acting on that. All years before this, since 2014................................................................................................................................................................................................. I have to come back in second place to when and in what year was asked for a wider evacuation of others. It is important to bear that in mind. The second is that we acted on false assumptions. We're responsible for that. That assumption was the speed of the rise of the Taliban. We're not alone in that. Is that an explanation? No. But it is just as it is: the relative weakness of the armed forces. A total overestimate has been made by the entire Western defense establishment \"Excuse for the word \"for how long\" they could or wanted to stand. The fall of Kabul was not foreseen by the Americans in this way either. If the Chamber knew this a long time ago, we clearly did not catch those signals. But this isn't the case, it didn't happen that way. If we had known before, it would have been worse and we would have acted sooner. We seem to have had a whole blind spot in how bad and how fast it would get. But that's a shared knowledge deficit. It is also a question for all intelligence services: what are we missing from the analysis?"}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-09-22-tweedekamer-2.u215", "speech text": "I get that. At least, I understand that the VVD makes choices and that she cares about defense. That is what the Christian Union thinks, and we, too, have allocated money to invest in defence. But at the same time, the landlord's tax. 'Cause one day it's going to be paid in for 1.7 billion. That was the beginning, under Rutte II cabinet. It's gotten caught. So we've taken something off each time, but we've only taken it off the growth. So they pay less more, the corporations, and that means that every time we grow, we still put a very heavy burden on the corporations that ultimately with their investment space have to make sure that there are affordable rental homes. Well, that investment space gets restricted every time. I get that we can't just sit on the back of a cigar box, that's not supposed to happen anymore, a cigar box, but still........................................................................................................................................................................................"}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-09-22-tweedekamer-5.u323", "speech text": "Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, good evening. Members of the Cabinet. It is sometimes said about JA21: why always focus on migration and asylum? Why would you do that? To quote Herman Finkers: a boy like that doesn't need that, does he? I'd like to tell you something about myself. When I met Pim Fortuyn in the spring of 2002, it was six months after 9/11, the day the world lost its innocence. We were in a cold and warm war with radical Islam. Fortuyn was their only hope for many Dutch people for years. He pointed out, served by his many publications and books, the dangers of Islam, the risks of new flows of migrants to the Netherlands and a very poor integration. Now we're standing here, on the Monkey Rock. It's now 20 years after 9/11 and about 20 years after Pim Fortuyn's murder. And what have we gotten out of here? The world is drifting. The European external borders are as leaky as a basket. Tens of thousands of asylum seekers come to Europe every week, many of them to the Netherlands. Our asylum policy is bankrupt. The COA is bursting out of its joints. Minister Ollongren says \"the bucket is overflowing,\" but she is the one who left the crane open. In the last two weeks 2,500 asylum seekers entered the Netherlands. That is as much as in Denmark in a whole year. We have three times more inhabitants than Denmark, but our influx is 25 times higher. Mr. Chairman. We give an open ticket to possibly thousands of Afghan asylum seekers and municipalities cannot accommodate the almost 30,000 status holders of already. Dr. Jan van de Beek calculated that the arrival of such a number of 2,500 asylum seekers would ultimately cost the society 1.4 billion euros. That is the complete annual budget of the municipality of Utrecht in two weeks time. If we do not slow down the influx, we are even at the level, at least on course, to approach the record of nearly 60,000 asylum seekers from the year 2015. Kantar's research showed us that two thirds of the Dutch want to limit immigration, two thirds. 91% of Dutch people do not see room for further population growth and almost 60% want asylum seekers to be accommodated in the region there and want a quota on asylum seekers. That is, for you in the room here, the Netherlands on average. That's not a particular group. That is the whole of the Netherlands, right through all the grassroots, through yours and my supporters and also through native and ethnic minorities. Research shows that non-Western immigrants are also largely in favour of immigration restrictions. In short, standing for a strict and just asylum policy is not xenophobic. That doesn't mean you hate a tan. It stands for our carefully built welfare state and realizes that our absorption capacity is finite. So let us do what the electorate wants us to do, and that is: create strict asylum laws that prevent lucky seekers, make shelter temporary and regulate good reception in the regions there. That's humane, but it's strict. I was in Copenhagen with colleague Eppink this summer. What happened there? We visited Denmark, where we studied the migration dossier on various facets, and what is most striking in Denmark is that the whole migration dossier is completely depoliticized. From left to right, people notice: this is strict, but it is just. No demonstrations, no refugee work Denmark coming to parliament with banners. No, they were even part of the system. They participated, for example, in the expulsion of people who are not allowed to stay in Denmark. They literally said to us: you better be there than you stand to demonstrate against it and have no influence. Anyway, in the Netherlands, instead of working to get our hands together, we are mainly concerned about The Hague's intrigues. We rule each other out, there's a settlement of accounts and listers mock each other. In short, the new governance style. I think there is a lot wrong with our way of working: ministers who insult MPs, ministers who remain unconstitutionalally MPs, lobbying former ministers, etc. We note our daily surprise and sometimes bewilderment in a document \"Haagse mores\" that we want to publish at some point. You know our JA21 mission. These are the holy three: migration, Europe and commitment to a healthy environment for taxpayers. So that is not achieving green targets for an unmeasurable little effect at astronomical cost, while China undos it in one day. The Netherlands will become a large wind turbine park and support for this will play no role in practice. Why are we putting complete primeval forests in the oven to achieve green targets on paper by 2030, while we are dawdling with nuclear energy? Four new nuclear power plants can meet half our electricity needs. What are we waiting for? JA21 is coming up with a proposal this year to make nuclear energy an important part of our energy supply. Mr. Chairman. The king said it: The Netherlands has an incredible potential. I think that many of the problems in the Netherlands are caused by the fact that we no longer dare to be ourselves. Our liberated spirit has been put to sleep by a government that takes us from the cradle to the grave and is burdening us far too heavily. Calculations show that purchasing power will remain on average zero: the energy bill will rise, fuel prices will rise, the messages will become more expensive, the care premium will rise again, and then I am not even talking about the municipal charges that are likely to increase significantly again. In short, can the Minister of Finance still be with us tomorrow to explain to us how he thinks we can all stay at zero? The collective burden burden is at the highest point in years: 39.1%. The problem is that the Dutchman still has to pay too much of the messages to the State thanks to the VAT increase of Rutte III, but also after your death due to the inheritance tax and savings and investments in box 3, in which you still pay tax on fictitious returns despite all promises. JA21 wants a drastic revision and simplification of the tax system, with an increase in purchasing power due to lower charges rather than endless pumping around of surcharges. A system in which work pays due to a higher tax-free rate of income tax and in which welfare benefits can never be more attractive than working for an income. But who is the most vulnerable, fighting and breathtaking target group right now? Ruud Lubbers said it 40 years ago: those are the entrepreneurs. Those are the entrepreneurs, not only because of corona, but also the huge burdens and the rules. Last year, the cost of the regulatory burden to SMEs increased to 20 billion a year! What is the plan of action for the minister of EZ? May I ask the Prime Minister to come back to that tomorrow? Mr. Chairman. There is so much more that JA21 is concerned about: that soon no one can leave the house before his 35th, in the total stalled housing file, perhaps the biggest challenge for the coming years, the shortage of care, both in terms of staff, salaries and ic-beds, the punishment of possession, diversity subsidies in culture and the suffocating wok-culture, strikingly portrayed this morning by Mr Wilders. We are buried in political correctness, also by our own Minister Van Engelshoven, and feelings of guilt. Everything must be purified. We're all fluid and have to go to the bathroom gender-neutral. Mr. Chairman. We went left into the ditch and we have to turn right out again. It's possible. Together with Annabel Nanninga I founded JA21 Yes indeed! The right-wing, reasonable voter, who has been displaced since 2002 and has been put out of play. They can vote for other parties, but they are then excluded by the VVD and the CDA, and so they go over left again. I think we've been able to see another nice tasting there today. JA21 wants to participate, preferably now, but perhaps in the next election. If it has to wait, we'll wait. Pim Fortuyn said it in The Hague on May 5, 2002 I was there, one day before the murder. He said in his speech, the last one he held, more than a week before the elections: \"What is it going to be: the change or will it be the rest of the cemetery?\" That's what he literally said. For him it became the cemetery, but for the Netherlands there is still hope. And now I'm going to the Millions Note. I have a few comments to make. I've been able to address some of them in the interruptions. We have a double feeling about the Millions note. We have seen that EUR 7 billion is going to the climate. That certainly doesn't seem like a missionary story. But on migration we see a very strong missionary status again. You're not gonna do anything about that. So you're mostly, it seems, missionary where it suits you. The extra 400 million for tackling undermining crime can appeal to us. Every penny of that is good. It just seems, unfortunately, Mr Heerma spoke true words about it a drop on the glowing record when you realize that last summer, for almost 600 million euros of cocaine was intercepted in the port of Rotterdam in one week. That's unprecedented. Police unions are disappointed for a reason. President Struijs even spoke of making cuts. The extra money doesn't go to extra cops, so he complained. The reduction of costs, which does not reduce purchasing power below the zero line, is highlighted prominently, but the climate is 30 times higher than the reduction of costs! The balance is lost. By way of illustration, only the plastic tax imposed on us by Brussels is almost as high as all the above mentioned relief. Of course, the euro transfer train is also moving towards southern Europe. The counter is now at 43 billion. Mr President, finally, defence. Defense's gonna get off the hook, too. Instead of working towards a 2% NATO standard, that seems very logical to us for a country like the Netherlands, we see expenditure falling as a percentage of GDP. So it goes from 1.49% this year to 1.38% in 2024, while the average expenditure of the European NATO counterparts is rising sharply, to 1.85%. That's not possible. The summer debacle in Afghanistan, I think, has shown how much defense is undressed. I do not think it is right that we in the Netherlands should let the allies take the chestnuts out of the fire on this point. Mr President, thank you very much. So far in this first term. See you tomorrow!"}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-09-22-tweedekamer-5.u327", "speech text": "Madam President. It seems like a familiar image that you hold General Political Reviews the day after Princess Day, but it is actually very unusual. It is also very unusual to hold general political reflections with a missionary cabinet. Mr Jetten and others have already pointed this out. Normally, we wait for the government statement. Then, a few months after the election, you're not going to hold any more General Political Reviews, with a missionary cabinet. So it's unusual. As a result, it is also a bit uncomfortable, because you cannot really discuss the policy for the coming years with the cabinet. At the same time, however, it is inevitable, because, as has already been said, this budget is more than'suitable to the shop'. Moreover, this declaration of government is not yet really coming, as far as we have been informed. In this respect, therefore, this is also an appeal to all the main players: do not delay, but take constructive steps with speed. Mr. Chairman. It is not difficult in this difficult political situation to talk to other parties about what went wrong, but it is not very helpful. That is why we prefer to take an inspiring story as a starting point for these General Reviews. That story could be called World Heritage, because all over the world people have been drinking this story for centuries. I actually think that almost everyone, from any party, knows that story. This is about David and Goliath: how a little shepherd boy defeats the strong giant with a pebble stone, and thereby frees Israel from the terror of the Philistines. What makes this history so appealing is that everyone thought that David didn't stand a chance. For a reason, no one dared stand up to that intimidating and heavily armed Goliath. When I was just rereading the Bible story for the lovers: it was found in 1 Samuel 17... I noticed how much attention was paid to Goliath's equipment: an impressive armor, a huge spear and a giant sword. No, than David: he was dressed in simple shepherd's clothes, and only had a shepherd's staff and a simple pendulum with some pebbles to keep a wandering sheep on the right path. But against everyone's expectations, David still wins. The great Goliath fell to the ground by a well- aimed stone from the garland of little David. The Philistines flee, and Israel can breathe relieved again. A nice sketch of Rembrandt of this story can now be found through my social media, as an illustration of this story. Madam President. This history continues to encourage people who dare to take on supremely powerful giants. That could be other people, but also a powerful multinational or a government agency that is not responding. It can also be your own worries or fears that squeeze your throat. But this history shows: the Goliaths of today can still be defeated. That is the encouragement for the exploited prostitute from Ukraine. That is the support for Christians in North Korea. That is the hope for a abused child in Rotterdam. Goliath doesn't have the last word. This also inspires to protect what is defenseless: unborn life or vulnerable life in old age. We need to protect that, not write it off or give it up. What impressed me is that sometimes with stories you remember from your childhood when I first heard that story of David and Goliath as a child, King Saul said to David: Take my armor. But David turned down that offer. He was most indignant of how Goliath defied the God of Israel and had a deep confidence that the same God would help him. As he stood up as a shepherd against the wolves who threatened his defenseless sheep and lambs, he now went into the field against the Philistine who attacked the people of Israel. That care, that protection, David drew when he later became king himself. You can also taste that attitude in the Dutch Declaration of Independence, the Act of Abandonment. Today it was about healthy patriotism and about the historical museum. I'm sure he'll get a place in that too. That Act of Abandonment has also been given a prominent place in our Chamber. Our predecessors, the then members of the States-General of the United Netherlands, proclaimed on July 26, 1581 that a prince as a servant of God is supposed to protect his subjects from all injustice and violence, like a shepherd there comes that image again with heart and soul protects his sheep. Now, centuries later, that is still the task for the government: to protect citizens from the Goliaths of today and not to force those same citizens into harnesses that threaten freedom of movement. Take the safety of the citizens. We have more than full hands in the fight against intimidating organised and violent crime. Conscienceless Goliaths in the drug world are literally about corpses. We've seen that again over the past few years. The battle is getting more brutal. Much has been done and much needs to be done. If I may mention another additional point, I would say: do not forget to invest in district agents. As general practitioners are the gateway to good care, district agents are essential for citizens' sense of security, whether vandalism or the detection of dangerous radicalisation, leading to terrorism. The SGP has been committed for years to re-breathe our outleted armed forces. It is nothing more or less than the defence of our freedom. Compared, for example, with the huge amounts that are now going to the climate, our army is getting nothing but a slap. That is why we are calling for additional investment. Think, for example, of additional means for air transport. Afghanistan has already been mentioned: the Hercules that had to stay on the ground, as an image of overdue maintenance. We call for an end to yojo policy and long-term agreements to strengthen our defence. Worldwide, courage and determination are needed in the fight against the Goliaths of radical Islam. What is the commitment not only to prevent Afghanistan from going to the philistines, but also to ensure that the success of the Taliban also encourages jihadism in other places? Does the harness of all migration agreements offer enough space to prevent anyone who wants to enter the Netherlands through the migration gate with dangerous thought? Mr. Chairman. Some people asked me, \"Have you brought some objects this time?\" Like I used to make a surprise. When Mr Eerdmans said \"there's something about to be thrown,\" I saw some of them looking worried: does the story of David and Goliath mean that I'm about to swing into the room? That's not what I was gonna do, not put safety in danger here. There's no need to bring anything today, either, because look behind me. Plenty of eggs. Natural material. Panels called earth. The artist assured us, when we first came here to this room, that we can all attach our own meaning to these images; that this fits with this art. I would say that perhaps the rocks that are on the back of the images could inspire us to look, like David, at how we can achieve our goal with smart and proportionate measures. We need to look at customization and make sure we don't lock people in armor. We should not advocate policies that, as it were, cripple people and give them insufficient freedom of movement, but rather give them room. Then I think about the fight against the corona virus. King Saul's OMT may have advised that there was no choice but to armor like David at the time, but David showed that it could be otherwise. Let there be room for an alternative approach, for basic freedoms, and certainly for the unappreciable freedom of conscience. So no straitjacket of vaccination coercion or urge. Last week, as my colleague Mr Stoffer said in the debate, the government took a risky path with that corona pass. Customization, an eye for the human size, is needed in more areas. The childcare allowance affair and the result of the investigation into the implementing agencies show that too many citizens can easily get caught up in government bureaucracy. Here's another world to win. Good proposals have already been made and it is important to implement them. Mr. Chairman. It is good to have an eye and an ear for the specific difficulty that people struggle with, but that does not mean that the most progressive views as a harness should be imposed on everyone. Several speakers have drawn attention to the gender debate today. I agree with that. Of course, people who experience great problems with their gender deserve help and support, but the current discussion really goes on when differences between men and women should no longer be mentioned. We want to stand for the classical Christian view, including in this area. Climate policy can also become an unbearable armor, especially if the objectives are fixed in laws and treaties. There is no doubt that climate policy is needed, but it must remain reasonable and realistic for everyone. For people with a small scholarship, for example, but also for farmers, who take care of our food. I'm getting the impression that they're getting muzzled until they can't move anymore. That's not supposed to happen, is it? The cabinet wants to invest 3 billion more in renewable energy production and 600 million in electric cars. That must be wise. The energy grid must be able to keep up with the sustainability. If things go wrong, we'll all be in the cold and in the dark soon. Therefore invest more in the power grid, is our call, and make sure that an average family can pay for a second-hand electric car. Note, for example, the position of the greenhouse horticulture. Mr. Chairman. Movement space, opportunities for professional choices, we also want to offer to all those who use their energy and gift in education and those who work with heart and soul in care. If more work is done on this, it will bring real progress, including in the search for new teachers and care workers, who are so desperately needed. Mr President, I will conclude. I started David's hero story. I love how he resisted Goliath. Yet it was David himself who observed that it was not his great qualities, but that it was God who helped him and gave him victory. He did not beat himself on the chest, but closed: \"The Lord is my shepherd, I shall lack nothing.\" The shepherd with a small h knew the Shepherd with a large h. He stood up for the honor of God and the welfare of the people. The SGP advocates a ministerable government, who in confidence as a servant of God seeks good for all citizens, with fall and rise, but with perseverance and with the good Shepherd par excellence: Christ, the son of God, who gave his life to poor sheep and who gathered the lambs in his arms and carried them when it was difficult. A cabinet that is so serviceable may rightly be called missionary. We look forward to a cabinet like that."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-09-23-tweedekamer-2.u190", "speech text": "That's a good question. Anyway, it's also a joint search for the best way. I said on Sunday in Hilversum that from D66, CDA and VVD an attempt would be made to approach a broader political centre, such as GroenLinks, Labour Party, Christian Union and other parties, to see if you could take a first step this week to make the budget more political. Then two parties said: at least we do not want to do so in private. I don't have a problem with that, so we'll do it here. That can also work very well. So what is the traditional way of making its views clear? I am not going to go over it, but I think these are motions and amendments. Then you should see if there are majorities for that. The government can respond to this, particularly in the light of the coverage, as Mr Jetten says. I imagine we can come a long way tonight. I hope so. I have, of course, views on that. From the forming parties D66, CDA and VVD there is the initiative of Mrs Hermans. That's a way to do that. Then you could agree on the use of those funds. But once again, the Chamber has to say where it's going. I very much hope that there will be a second moment in which we will have the formation in motion very quickly. Then you're going to look at the budget process in a rather fundamental way. That's already so far on the way. That is a bit \u00e0 la 2012 with the Labour Party and the VVD. We asked very quickly: how are we going to make this budget even more political and make some changes? We can do that if the formation starts. That is actually quite easy, because then you can say from the forming parties: we are coming up with a bigger amendment to the budget that is already there. Then no one will blame it for happening from the back rooms. That will then be a letter of amendment. Coalition parties that are not part of the formation can just vote what they want. Coalition parties which are part of the formation can go along with that. If that doesn't work, then the point comes from Omtzigt. There comes a time when, as a Chamber on a larger scale than Mrs Hermans' present proposal, you have to say: we have to look at what majorities are for. Yesterday, Mrs Ploumen and Mr Klaver said: perhaps we want to do bigger things already. Of course, the Chamber is free to do so. That's not up to me. What if today it was limited to the billion? I'm not going over it, but suppose there are majorities to be found for how you spend it. Suppose the formation starts, then you can discuss a larger change in the budget with the forming parties. If that doesn't work, it gets complicated, because then you have to start thinking about a process that will bring you to Chambers for example to tackle nitrogen and the climate. Of course, much more needs to be done than is stated in this budget. Also on all major issues, such as undermining, defense and education, you need to figure out how to make 2022 a policy-rich year. I myself think it's almost impossible to avoid having to sit in a room with each other for once, without a TV camera. And yes, I'm sorry, that seems like old governance culture. But perhaps we can make that great movement in debates in the Chamber with motions and amendments. I'm open to it. It's possible. That's a joint search. Of course, we have not done so before. I hope that is not necessary, because the formation is now in progress. Then you fall back into the well-known 2012 system, which is a budget change by the forming parties. That's how I'd see it, but I'm open to any other suggestion."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-09-23-tweedekamer-5.u442", "speech text": "Sure, absolutely. We also have to work towards that 2% in the end. The European figures show that NATO counterparts are expected to reach an average of 1.76% in 2022 and 1.85% in 2024. This is, of course, ultimately also an obstacle to our influence within NATO and to our influence in the international community. This counts. People are looking at this. That's the freerider risk of a defense budget that's too low."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-09-28-eerstekamer-11.u413", "speech text": "Thank you very much, Mr President. Thanks to the defenders. I started to say this afternoon how inspiring the Binnenhof was for me in preparing this debate, but what a defense this was! It was very inspiring. Thank you very much for that. To be honest, I wish every initiative proposal such defenders and such an advisor. Let that be said. I would also like to thank the Minister for his commitment to international research. That is a very small response to what I have put forward on behalf of my group, but I am certainly pleased with that step. I would also like to thank my fellow Members for the debate. I say to Mr Backer that this is a fundamental issue. With great respect for the exchange of views and for their educational nature, I would like to stress that, especially for me when it comes to the exchange of views with all of you, this also means that you can achieve different results in such a fundamental matter. As far as we are concerned, this is the case, because our concerns about the complexity of the legislation, its feasibility and also its affordability have persisted. I'll take one trip in there when it comes to an example. I mentioned several examples this afternoon in the first term. It strikes me that the response in particular brings out the execution tests. Mr Snels mentioned them and Mr Snelter touched on them, but the Minister made a number of comments. They are really put forward as some sort of supporting ground when it comes to feasibility. I think I have heard the Minister say 'we have really taken the time'. I didn't go through all 314 pages, but I really thought, \"Can this be true?\" I looked at a lot of them pretty quickly after all. Let me give you a few examples. LNV and EZ say: it has been a very tight timetable. We urge that a full implementation test be carried out in due course. The CJIB talks about a global inventory and says not to be able to say much about it because it really had to be very fast. The Return and Departure Service says: we haven't actually been able to have it investigated, because it really had to be too fast. The D.A. says it's a gross, preliminary assessment because of the short time frame for the analysis. OCW says: a very short time frame, so think of this as a finger exercise, a well-educated guess. And finally JenV, not even the smallest department: \"Even for a legally skilled department like ours, it is extremely difficult to interpret this law properly. We find that particularly difficult. This makes the consequences for the implementation particularly difficult to assess.\" I do not understand, then, that is the question with which I would like to finish how the proposers, but also the minister, can lean so heavily on these execution tests. I'd like to leave it at that."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-09-30-tweedekamer-11.u236", "speech text": "Mr. Chairman. Briefly, the following. In the preparation of this debate I have, of course, also read many articles written about the case that is at the heart of today's debate. Of course, I have also read the NRC article once, but also articles from other magazines, including the Reformatorisch Dagblad. They have had a whole series in which opponents and opponents and so on and so on were all discussed. There was also a lot of emotion in those articles, which I understand by the way. I found the end of that show. I quote: \"A feeling of safety begins with you accepted knowing as a human being. That doesn't fit in with sharp words. Here is work for all educators.\" I think those were wise words, words where the focus was on what should be at the centre, namely: the pupils, the children who were involved and involved. It also touched me, because I myself had spoken with a number of people who also came back in the NRC article and had heard from other former students of the school and from their own mouths what they experienced and how they experienced it, how it worked out on them, not only in the time they were at school but also in the years after. Mr. Chairman. A number of honourable Members have also referred to a recent report, namely that of the University of Utrecht and of the University of Groningen. Together they did that research and the results are really shocking. That so many students, Ihbti students do not feel safe and that there is even bullying behaviour by teachers, is really very intense. Your heart cries when you think about those situations, even when I think about what I have heard in the personal conversations of these students of the Gomarus. That's why I repeat the RD: here's work for all educators. But we are making it even wider: here is work for everyone who in any way bears a responsibility for ensuring a safe environment for students, especially for students with an Ihbti background. Can we guarantee 100% safety? I believe that we should make the most of this, that we should do everything in our power to offer this safe environment for children. That is what we must do: at home, at school, anywhere in the society where they are. That is also the approach I take to this issue, but also the way in which I will, from my administrative responsibility on behalf of the cabinet, address a number of very specific questions that have been raised. Mr. Chairman. Which brings me to the report. That report is solid. It is the school itself that asked for an investigation when the article of the NRC came out with the personal experiences of students; some of you also referred to it. I appreciate the school doing that. The inspection has started immediately, in accordance with the legal bases that are in place. The inspection doesn't just work out a little bit in the wild, just to put it down. No, the inspection will have a clear mission, which we have secured by law and regulation. In particular, Article 15 of the Education Supervision Act provides them with legal bases for carrying out such research. They've gone to work. I'll come back to the years before. You could say that, at the time the investigation was started, this did go by the book and the way we recorded it with each other. The inspection is conducting its independent investigation. I repeat, independent investigation. The inspection has produced a report on this matter and has spoken with many interested parties. In the end, the inspection based on these interviews has prepared a report containing recovery orders, as is the case with such investigations, if necessary. It sets out very concretely the shortcomings of this school. The school itself has also put its own hands into this. The school has indicated that many things may go well at that school, including in terms of quality and safety. A lot of students feel safe. But the next thing should be central, because this can never be an excuse to do your job on other parts. It has been pointed out that mistakes have also been made and that there is work to be done for these educators, for those who are involved in the school, and that work needs to be done on this. When the draft report was finished, of course the school was able to give its views. That's the way it's supposed to be. You found it later, too, when it went public. The school has indeed made some comments. That room's here. This will also be fully public and may be part of further discussions that will take place afterwards. But the school has taken one other step. They have tried to stop the publication of the report through the amenities court. That right has a school. This has been included in our regulations. But in the end, the amenities court gave room for the inspection, let me put it this way, to make the report public. That's how it happened. I have already been able to tell you that the school board has indicated that we are now getting to work on the recovery assignments that have been given. The administration of the school is, of course, the one who is addressed, also in accordance with the way in which we have organised supervision. I can tell you that at the moment there is already a concept approach at the school to get to work on it. By the way, they have already started on parts. That word \"concept\" will go off in October, so next week. Then the inspection will take another stand in mid-November, because indeed: the sooner it can, the better. I think that was also a question from Mrs Paul. In January of this year, it will also simply have to be ready and the investigation will then take place to assess whether the school has finally done what we can ask them to do in accordance with the laws and regulations that we have in this regard. Mr. Chairman. This is how we decorated it with each other. Some of you have pointed this out. Still, there was one thing bothering me. This article came in this calendar year. The problem identified, which has been very serious for students, took place in 2016. So a number of years have passed. How is that possible? A number of Members of Parliament have asked me to do so. There is no real reporting obligation for abuses like this. There are parts in which a school, if it finds that in the school, is obliged to report directly to the inspection. That doesn't include this sec. That does not mean that you cannot expect a school to report it to the inspection when such matters arise. They also have a contact there. This was not done in 2016. That didn't happen in 2019. In 2016, the board indicated that they didn't really know what was happening, that it had stayed at a lower level in the school, so to speak. But in 2019, when a former student went back to the school, the board knew that and then it didn't. In 2020, the four-year inspection survey was conducted, organised according to the new method that started in 2017, as you know. Then the question is always asked, in general terms, even when it comes to social security: are there any details you have to report? That's when they kept quiet. So you see that it's very complicated to get moving eventually, at the moment when there's no talking. I think it should be different. I think that this kind of thing simply needs to be reported. Mr. Chairman. The initiative law of Bishop, Rog and Van Meenen, which also deals with inspection supervision, is now a number of years old and needs to be evaluated, as stated in the law and that has been agreed. That is going to happen very quickly now. I suggest to the Chamber that I take this part with me in order to make arrangements in that evaluation that if a situation such as this arises, there should simply be a notification. As far as I am concerned, the list of subjects to be reported should be extended. Then we can avoid situations like this, where people do not report actively. We have no legal basis to say that they should have done so, at most in the case of the study that did not take place until 2020. Then we'll have more in our hands, I guess, to get there faster too. That is only one side of the matter, because of course it is not just a question of reporting a school. I shall come back later to the fact that I believe that much more is needed and can also be done to speed up the picking up of signals about abuses, and to have a climate in a school that can also be discussed more quickly. At times when you don't feel safe, it's also very difficult to open your mouth to say something about something you experience as unpleasant. We have a responsibility for this too, but I will come back to the third block in a few moments, about the faster picking up of signals. Mr. Chairman. The report has been independently established. I think it would be very bad if we were going to take things out, criticize that report in a daylight that it wouldn't be right. This is the work of the inspection. That is what we asked for from the inspection. It even has a legal basis. On that basis, we must now act simply. The inspection is not a party that when something happens in a school as a kind of referee and says: it is right or it is not or you name it, how you see that in mind when you think of a case like this or perhaps others. The inspection looks at the implementation of the adequacy requirements, and that of course has everything to do with the Education Supervision Act, how it went, how the school set it up and how it was secured so that those things that we ask of a school also take place. On that basis, the report is also built up. Once again, I am pleased to stress this, and I would also like to congratulate the school on the fact that, after the judge had spoken, we have just started to work, and so now, in view of the children, we are also in the process of carrying out the recovery assignments. Mr. Chairman. Specific questions have also been asked about a section of the report, namely how to deal with the coulance regime. That has also been part of the trial, the interim proceedings that have taken place. By the way, that's all public information. So you can find exactly what has been said and what the judge has said about it. There is still a difference of opinion with the school as to whether or not this should be financed from public funds. So these are not own resources. The inspection considers that it should not have been financed in this way, and I share that view. A recovery will therefore take place. It is an amount of \u20ac2,500 which in any case should not have been paid out of these funds. A school sometimes also has its own resources, but these resources should not have been spent on them. That amount will therefore be recovered. The inspection will do that. Mr. Chairman. Then the report. I'm saying, that's pretty intense. I was able to answer Mr Bishop's questions today. That was just as hard work, because the deadline lasted even longer. It has occurred a number of times, but not very often, and it is also the first time it occurs on this ground. When there is a suspicion of a criminal offence, the inspection is indeed obliged to report it. What has been included in the school policy documents, in any case, is clearly relevant to this. I thought it was Mr Wassenberg who came back to that a number of times in interruptions. I look at the defense of the school, it is said to have been a dead letter, but it was there, but also the fact that at least the inspection suspects that unequal treatment has taken place. A report is pretty intense. In this way that has not happened before, but when there is a reasonable suspicion of a criminal offence it will... Maybe it will happen more often, but let's hope not, because we would prefer it not to happen. The state's attorney's office is now considering it. In the end, it will have to decide whether or not it will continue. I hope, also for the school, that this will be clarified as soon as possible. But that's up to the state's attorney's office. Mr President, perhaps also a personal note. I've been there personally. You are well aware of this: that debate in November on the Citizenship Act. I have explained how fundamental rights work and the relationship between fundamental rights. We then came to talk about the identity statements. At that moment I honestly didn't know if they were still there and what exactly was in it, because it had suddenly arrived on the table. Then I was too instrumental in my response. I think it is a mistake of my own; it might be good to say a few words about it, just in this Chamber. I have explained to you that my job is how the Constitution works, that there are conflicting fundamental rights and that you have freedoms, but also that the freedom you have must never be a reason to take the right of another person out of his hands. You remember the discussion. Look at the report. I would also recommend this to Mrs Simons, because she has now put something in my mouth that I have not said. We've done that very carefully with each other. As a result, when the impression arose, I gave rise to it myself, so I would approve that, if homosexuality was rejected in statements of identity, parents would sign it, but that was not the case. The only thing I did in the end is ask Mr Kwint if he wanted to continue his motion, so that I had some time to figure it out. The request to keep it has given the impression that I would therefore agree with it. Well, those of you who were there know that that wasn't my words at all. Anyway, that has had quite a dynamic and it has even led to declarations in my direction. So be it. It happens. Those reports said that I had said things I hadn't said. Plus: In a public debate in a Chamber, of course, there is also an immunity. By the way, it really took a long time for the Public Prosecutor's Office to say that it would not proceed further. But I also know personally what that means. That's not good. I hope, therefore, for the school too, that it will be clear soon. We also know that, should the Public Prosecutor's Office carry out further investigations, the case will be looked at with other eyes. Anyway, we're gonna see what's gonna come out of that eventually. Mr Van Meenen asked whether this should not be standard practice. If there is any suspicion that a criminal offence has been committed, then it will simply be reported. By the way, that is something that every Dutchman has to offer. The same applies to the inspection and to the Ministry. That has happened in the past. In this case, the inspection has done so. I have been informed of this by means of a notice of office, but also by my colleague, Mr Van Engelshoven. The school has also been informed. We'll see how that goes. Mr. Chairman. Then there are questions about faster picking up signals about abuses. I have already said one thing about this, namely that I think that if something like that happens, a school should just report it. Then the inspector who's attached to a school can just talk to them and see what happened. One just needs to report it actively. So now there is no obligation. There's a list of obligations, like I said. For example, if it's a suspicion of a sex crime, then you're really obligated to report it directly. Think also of suspension and removal. We are also going to look at this in terms of competence requirements, but we are going to look at it separately. So that is what we come back to when we evaluate the law. That'll be early '22. Secondly, Mr Van Meenen said that we have experience with the fact that the inspection does not pick up signals. I think he was thinking about the same case as me: VMBO Maastricht. I'm going there on Monday, by the way. Things are going incredibly well there at the moment. That school really did a huge job. It's also nice to be able to say that here. As a result of Maastricht, we have made agreements. We've kept it. It's really changed. The inspection is no longer waiting for a lot of signals to come in on a subject, so to speak, to see what to do. That was actually the situation at VMBO Maastricht: a few signals had been received. It is now decorated in a different way, which means that individual signals are actually picked up faster. But they have to be given, don't they? Those signals are therefore involved in the inspection monitoring that is taking place. It is also very good to include such signals. But you can also act faster if you need to. We also made sure that the inspection had more people to do so. A number of FTEs have been added, specifically for this section. Nevertheless, it did not work here, because there was no signal either. Of course, that is where it stands or falls in the end. We can want a lot and organize a lot, but there has to be a signal coming in. I can't help but... We also just looked back: did we miss something or something? But it really did not come out until one of the students involved, even though it has become more, made public through the newspaper what took place at the time. The discussions on picking up signals have already been held and are being intensified. In addition, and this is what we are going to do in practice, we want more frequent consultations between inspection, Stichting School & Security and organisations representing the interests of gay people, including the COC. They should simply meet more frequently. They will then be able to communicate with each other what they see from their perspective. I'm thinking of a COC, but of course there are more of those organizations. They come to schools and hear things. They can then share what they hear with the inspection but also with the School & Security Foundation. I am convinced that these agreements are now being made that if you have regular consultations on them, that also, where necessary, will allow you perhaps to act faster than in the situation where you have to wait until you get back to school. I would like to mention three more things, Mr President. We've been working for a long time to raise the profile of the trust inspector in the school. Perhaps the Chamber will remember, I tell you, Mr President, that not long ago I sent a letter to the Chamber following the National Youth debate. I came into that conversation with young people about the confidant. In fact, it turned out that she or the threshold was too high or sometimes didn't even know where the threshold was. In short, they were very unknown to it, and if they knew who it was, they would not even dare to go there. Of course, that's not good. We are talking to those who, from their professional point of view, are responsible for trust inspectors. We're trying to get rid of barriers there. We are also in the process of removing the grounds of trust inspectors when they are required to make a notification. I have just indicated that a report should be made if there is a sex crime, but we also want a report to be made if there are suspicions. In this respect, therefore, we are considering whether we can lower the threshold to inspectors of trust by means of specific agreements, but that must also change in school cultures, which is more difficult than making agreements. Mr. Chairman. Mr Van Meenen asked for unexpected visits. I get that. I think he brought that up when we discussed the frameworks of the administrative instruments before the law. I didn't organize it that way myself, but it just so happens that that law came to you today. Last Friday it was dealt with in the Council of Ministers and after the King had signed it, it was sent to you further. During that debate Mr Van Meenen tabled the motion. The inspection has now re-established a monitoring framework, which includes the basis on which it conducts investigations. I believe that this is with you and a written round is taking place. That is now part of the inspection action. We want to get rid of the four-year routine. It will last well in some schools, but there are also schools where you have to go more, where you have to go at other times and where you sometimes have to go unexpectedly. This is now part of the monitoring framework from which the inspection does its job. Then the last thing I want to say about picking up signals faster. You can see that we can work on different lines, but that the basis is every time or is spoken and whether one feels free to speak. That's what it's all about in the end. We can do everything we can to promote this and offer it easy-to-access opportunities. Let me give you an example before I mention the very last one: conversations with the children's phone. You've got The Child's Phone \"Just\" called \"Just\" but you also have Chris, who is a bit more for the Christian world. That's where kids can do their stories anonymously. One must know that they can refer, know when to refer and know that they can ask children to move. Again there are opportunities that may not always be exploited. Of course, that's hard to see. There's a lot going on in confidence and confidentiality. But that would be nice. Next month, in October, you will receive the evaluation of the Social Security Act, which entered into force several years ago. The evaluation is almost done. I would like to suggest that I write down the parts of the things that I am referring to here before you too, so it will come to you very quickly and that we involve them in the treatment of the Social Security Act so that we can take a break. Perhaps there are many more additions that can be very helpful for the purpose. I believe that we have this goal in common: we want these children to feel safe, that everyone involved also contributes to it, and that preventive action is taken if necessary. That is what we want to achieve with each other. That's about picking up signals faster."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-10-05-tweedekamer-23.u187", "speech text": "Mr. Chairman. The current coalition of VVD, CDA, D66 and the Christian Union will negotiate a start. That's not good news. That is actually a threat, a threat to the Netherlands. These parties have hurt society a lot in recent years. Because almost ten months ago, this cabinet of VVD leader Rutte, D66 leader Kaag, CDA leader Hoekstra and ChristianUnion leader Segers had to resign because it had been scandalously failed. In all these years they played a dirty and mean game to cover that failure: lying to the Chamber and withholding information. There was rarely more judgment by the House of Representatives about the conduct of the cabinet. Unfamiliar injustice, destroyed thousands of parents and children. Mr. Chairman. In the past few months we saw a huge play along the content, because they wanted to come out again on the same cabinet. And now Rutte, Kaag, Hoekstra and Segers go on like nothing happened. \"Yes,\" said their spin doctors, \"you have to say, if you're outside, it's gonna be different.\" Politics as a detergent; the same packaging, the same content, the same misery, but shouting out loud that it is improved, that it is now working. 'Cause they promised to get better! It would all be different. Rutte, Kaag, Hoekstra and Segers fell into the same patterns. Because what have we seen since that promise for a radical new governance culture? We saw a minister and a secretary of state who switched to grab money at a lobby club, a secretary of state who spends thousands of euros on a state attorney for advice on a private matter. We also have a finance minister who has to fight tax avoidance, while he himself invests in letterbox companies and tax havens. His excuse: I didn't know. If only other Dutch people could fall back on that. Kaag and Bijleveld failed hopelessly with regard to the Afghan interpreters. Their defense: it was chaos, it all happened so fast, we didn't know. Rutte III runs weekly from one scandal to another. Mr. Chairman. These parties were unable to solve the fundamental problems in society. Four years of VVD, D66, CDA and the Christian Union has resulted in the following. Hundreds of thousands of homes are in short supply, the number of homeless has doubled, 400,000 children in poverty, the parents from the premium crime have still not been helped, and this is how it is going to last until midnight. Now Rutte, Kaag, Hoekstra and Segers say we're gonna do it differently. Then I'm thinking, do you believe that? Tell that to the cat. Politics is not a detergent. So many words, so many excuses, so many sorrys, and at the end of the ride you know what the outcome is. Mr. Chairman. The VVD, D66, the CDA and the Christian Union that are going to form a government together: that is not good news. My group will fight the politics of these parties here in the Chamber. We are opposed to the erosion of access to justice, to the inhumane way in which this cabinet deals with refugees, to affordable housing, to poverty and to the swift and fair handling of all children and parents in the bonus crime. Thank you, Mr. Chairman."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-10-06-tweedekamer-2.u7", "speech text": "Mr. Chairman. In front of us are the Millions note, the budget and all kinds of explorations from different planning agencies. Bookworks full of numbers, tables and graphs. Interesting reading for us as financial spokesmen, but behind all these figures are the stories of very ordinary people. In this Millions note you can clearly read two different stories. The first is a rather violent story about a country that is in a huge crisis and that is going through it. It is visible in the Millions note and in the deep red figures and declining graphs, but it was especially noticeable in the quiet streets, the empty roads and the abandoned train stations and in offices, shops and schools that had to close, while hospitals flooded. Never before has our economy been artificially shut down, never before has our society come to a standstill in this way and never before have we faced such a huge health crisis. An unprecedented contraction in the economy was the result of unprecedented budget deficits and rising debt as a result of unprecedented measures. All these shitty measures were necessary, but let's just be honest, it was a very difficult period for everyone. The second story is fortunately a much more optimistic story. This is about a country with enormous resilience and adaptability. We started working at home, zooming, kids were taking digital classes, we were having digital drinks, and we were doing messages for each other. Entrepreneurs continued to fight hard and put their last savings into their business. Like the owner of a bookstore not far from here where I often come. In December she had spent her last savings on Christmas lighting to cheer the store up in the hope of making up for some of the losses at Christmas to hear a week later that the Netherlands had to go back into lockdown. Fortunately, she and all those entrepreneurs were able to count on emergency support. Well spent money preventing many bankruptcies and allowing the economy to make a flying start after corona. The economy is growing again, and how! After a free fall, the economy rises again. Budget deficits are falling and for the first time in a long time there have been more vacancies than the unemployed. Worldwide, our country is being watched with admiration. How do these Dutch people do that? One of the successes is our modern economy. We have many different companies and are not dependent on one sector. Our economy is driven by knowledge, which you can't deactivate with a lockdown. And we're at the forefront of digitalization, for example, which allowed us to work through lockdowns, get kids lessons and keep seeing our family. But I have to be honest, too. We are in danger of falling behind on a number of things. That makes us vulnerable, and we must not let that happen. In the Millions note, the cabinet takes a few important first steps. First of all, security and investment in tackling organised crime, security and police. Over half a billion euros. We have added another 200 million to that in the General Political Reviews with the Hermans motion. It's the biggest investment in our security for a long time. And rightly so! In the debate on the Spring note, I asked the Minister for more insight into the rejected financial claims, say the calls for extra money that the cabinet rejected. Can the Minister address the Justice and Security budget in this context and answer the question whether we are already doing what is necessary with this mega-investment to make the Netherlands safer or whether there are still deficits? Because we need to strengthen the fight against organised crime. They threaten to destroy everything that makes the Netherlands such a beautiful country, an open and free country. People who work hard for our rule of law will be murdered in broad daylight. Entrepreneurs are destroyed and families are threatened by unsavory criminals. It's scum and it has to stop. We are also at risk of falling behind in our international security. The rise of undemocratic blocs of power, instability at the edges of Europe and aggressive, authoritarian countries threatening our security. Europe will have to defend our own security much more. This calls first and foremost for a strong military force and for strong alliances, such as NATO and the European Union, for a country like the Netherlands. In the Millions note some holes are closed in the defense budget. Fine, but not nearly enough. We have also cleared 300 million extra for this in the General Political Reviews with the Hermans motion for a resolution in order to eliminate delays. But this too will not be enough. In the Millions note, the cabinet does indicate how important the military is. That is right, but it does not say what is necessary to ensure that this force functions properly and to fulfil our international obligations. Three years ago, the Minister of Defence indicated that more than EUR 4 billion is needed to bring the armed forces to the European NATO average. I ask the Minister: is that still the case? Is it true that, on average, our economy is always rising faster than our defence expenditure, which means that we will never make it to NATO standards, even if we invest billions in them? Shouldn't there be a rule whereby we always allow defence spending to go hand in hand with the economy in order to meet our international obligations? In fact, this is what we are doing with the EU payments. Mr. Chairman. We will also have to invest extra in climate policy. We need to invest in greening our industry and clean, stable energy production. In addition to solar and wind energy, we must also invest in nuclear energy. Besides our physical infrastructure, we will also have to invest in our energy infrastructure. The Millions note takes the first steps, including in hydrogen. It is a crucial first step towards a sustainable hydrogen economy. I would like to know from the Minister whether the follow-up plans to further develop that hydrogen infrastructure are already in place. Is that at least being worked on so we don't waste any time? Mr. Chairman. We're facing big challenges. In addition to investing in security, defence, energy and climate, we also need to invest in homes, overdue maintenance of our infrastructure, education and innovation. As financial spokesmen, we must ask how we pay for all this. For many parties there is a simple answer to this: increase taxes, and preferably among entrepreneurs. I think that's unwise. It completely ignores the realization that money we spend here must first be earned. It goes without saying that you should therefore encourage entrepreneurship rather than slow down and that companies are not anonymous offices, but that very normal people work there, who simply earn their living. I also think it would be unwise to make cuts. It is simply not necessary, because the economy is in good shape. I therefore believe that it is wise that we should finance one-off expenditure on, for example, overdue maintenance and the construction of a new energy infrastructure from the general funds. Or simply put: that we can borrow, and thus increase public debt, for investments that are structurally strengthening the economy. Mr. Chairman. It's possible. From an economic point of view, the Netherlands is well off the corona crisis. There are, of course, personal dramas behind it. The Minister said it nicely: if I could have signed for this, I would have. I very much agreed with that. It is also understandable that he said that, with a public debt of over 60%. After an economic crisis, an enormous economic crisis, and after 80 billion in aid measures! In the next few years, that government debt will continue to fall to 50% and even, if you look a little further, to 27%. Mr. Chairman. We're a thrifty country, but we shouldn't be stingy. We need to use the space we have now, especially given the challenge we face and the low interest we pay. That doesn't mean that the lockers can just open. Somewhere we'll have to limit ourselves. Structural expenditure should therefore simply be covered, in accordance with the opinion of the Study Group on Budgets. That study group also recommends a separate system for one-off investments, so that we can use money smarter over the years. From that point of view, in addition to the National Growth Fund, we could also, for example, set up a national recovery or transition fund. What possibilities does the Minister see for this? And does he see room to fill those funds? Mr. Chairman. Where the Netherlands does have the financial space, other countries clearly do not have it. Many countries went into the corona crisis with poor public finances and came out worse. The Millions note goes into this as well. The global level of public debt has never been so high historically, with worrying outliers, such as Italy with a 160% public debt. The colleague already referred to it. Now I believe that Europe has no debt but a growth problem. This growth requires reforms, not more debt. I therefore follow with some concern the debate on the adaptation of European budgetary rules and attempts to eliminate certain expenditure from the deficit standard. Does the Minister share those concerns? How does he look at the sustainability of Europe's debt mountain, also because it is only maintained by an ECB that lets the money presses run. That is once finite, especially given the risk of inflation. And then what?"}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-10-06-tweedekamer-7.u108", "speech text": "You gonna be okay? Thank you. Dear MPs, rulers and residents of the Netherlands. Today we are talking about the General Financial Reviews. The billions are flying all over us. As representatives of the people and decision-makers of the budgets, the outgoing cabinet gave us a generous extra financial space of EUR 1 billion, according to the cabinet, to do something nice with it. For the average resident a huge amount, but it is only EUR 1 billion compared to EUR 334 billion in income. So crumbs. 0.3% of the budget. In the meantime, however, the amount has increased to EUR 2 billion. Lower the landlord's tax a little bit, but don't abolish it. Slowing down maintenance delays in the Defense Department, but not resolving them. Lower the household energy bill a little bit, but not take into account the large increases that are currently taking place. The energy bill becomes priceless for middle income. One year ago an average four-person household paid \u20ac507 on an annual basis for gas and light, excluding taxes and charges, has now risen to \u20ac1,229. This reported onlinecompare gaslicht.com this week. Dear inhabitants of the Netherlands; long live the strong economy, and o, we only look at the treasury, not at your wallet. Despite all the fine words about a strong economy, the ministers keep their hands on the cut, just at the points that hit people in the street. The ordinary, hard-working citizens. The pensionados with an AOW's and a small pension, which has not been indexed for years. For decades the snot worked in front of the eyes and built our country, and then smell for thanks. Super economic growth rates, but in reality more expensive messages, a higher energy bill, sky-high prices for petrol, crooked to pay your rent, and municipalities and provinces that do have to raise the housing costs in order to get their own budgets around. The citizen as a milk cow. Then the plans with our farmers. While the WHO and the UN Food Organization, the FAO, have been calling for a long time because global food security is at risk, nearly 1 billion people are already suffering from hunger, parties want to trade fertile agricultural land here for ponds and other nature. The fact that farm nature is also nature is never mentioned anywhere. But peasant nature is also nature. And the land provides us with good, safe, sustainable, affordable and always available food. The agricultural sector also provides the Netherlands with an economic contribution of over EUR 100 billion. On farmland, where ever good, nutritious and protein-rich grass grew, natural pastures managed by Natural Monuments can no longer be mowed for free by farmers, because they are full of knight acidification. So that's not suitable for cows. Protein rich and healthy grass for cows should be brought to the landfill, because the field is full of weeds. That grass is inedible and indigestible for humans, but thanks to cows it is transformed into high-quality nutrients, in the form of milk, from which yoghurt, cheese, butter and cheese can be made. That weed is good for the birds, but not suitable for food production. It is also much more expensive to mow, because Natural Monuments have to do it themselves. If you tell this to the starving people in the world, they won't believe you and they'll make you look crazy. Mr. Chairman. 0.3% of the population makes the food for the other 99.7%. These 0.3% are our farmers, growers and growers, and our fishermen, not to mention. That percentage gets lower every year. With future plans, that rap gets even lower. While the alarm clock is sounded due to the need for food security, our food makers must give way. EUR 1 billion has been earmarked for this purpose. This is the same amount that Dutch municipalities lack in their budgets and with which they could maintain roads, keep the library open or green the city. That is EUR 1 billion, which means that our food makers, who produce in the most efficient and therefore sustainable way and who can export their knowledge to teach other countries how to do so, must be bought out or expropriated or, in the most extreme case, to take away their licence. But what if the farmers, as has been said, are those sectors contributing EUR 100 billion to the e.g. the Netherlands? Then who's gonna take care of our landscape? Our landscape, with bulb fields, cows in meadows and ditches, attracts millions of tourists every year, spending tens of millions of euros in our SME businesses, such as catering and retail. That landscape looks like this through and thanks to our farmers and gardeners, and is managed by them. In many cases this happens together with local nature associations, who also fear the rapid pace with which farmers disappear. Who's gonna run that landscape later? The government? And who's gonna pay for that? The burger? And how much is the citizen going to cost, we ask the Minister. Is that calculated? Is all this also mentioned to the public when talking about buying out, expropriating and taking away farmers' permits? Who takes care of the thriving rural tourism and local food sales when the farmers' campsites, the ice farms, the milk taps and the grocery stores are gone? Who ensures social bonding in the countryside, the barns that farmers make available free of charge to carnival associations to build their cars and the meadows that are made available for festivals or as a parking lot at a festival? In winter, who voluntarily pushes away the snow with tractors on the rural roads where scattering services never come? Have we thought about that? What do the law do with the 600,000 people who work directly and indirectly in the agricultural sector, the contractors, the transport companies, the barn builders, the agricultural schools, the machine manufacturers, Wageningen University and so on? Do we know that yet? We want to spend more than 1 billion to reduce nitrogen by buying out, expropriating farmers and, in extreme cases, taking away their permit, but what will society soon cost, both socially and financially? I'm guessing a multiple of them. Has that even been considered at all, or should we always be held hostage by threatening court cases of government-funded NGOs? And what about the disappearance of family businesses and small and medium-sized enterprises, which are also well-off in a healthy agricultural sector? Mr President, I would like to make a few more points. The citizens must once again be at the heart of the issues of finance. We want financially sound citizens and that the agreements with the municipalities from 2018 are respected for the Province and the Municipal Fund. So we want extra financial space for the Empire to also increase the amount of money for these funds and that the citizen does not have to be used as a milk cow in a higher ozb again. Can the Minister explain why he seems to be abandoning this agreement? We want a strong sustainable economy, including as regards professionals. We want to continue investing in sufficient personnel for care, education, police and defense. We want the IRS in order. We would like to hear from the Minister what monitoring and combating fraud costs per year. Walt delivers the net in euros and how many extra successfully collected attacks and/or fines does it yield? Do the costs outweigh the benefits? The supplemental scandal. The Secretary of State stated that it may be years before the victims of this black page are compensated and recognized in Dutch history. And not only compensated, but also properly compensated for what has been done to them! It didn't happen to them, as the Secretary of State fortunately doesn't say anymore. Why not pay everyone and accept that small percentage of fraudsters as unavoidable damage? Tens of thousands of devastated families have to wait now, because half a man and a horse's head might take advantage of the situation. We're looking for that one fraud and we're leaving ten others in the cold. Finally, Mr President. The farmer and the citizen aren't files, they're people. Treat them the same way. In the countryside there is a word for it, a way of life, and that is called \"nobility.\" Thank you."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-10-13-tweedekamer-6.u310", "speech text": "I believe that this has been appointed on every occasion where the various measures have been discussed. You called it parental leave. I am defending this proposal here. I wasn't with that defense. So I can't use my own words right now here, because I didn't say them. But Mr. Kwint pretends it's a big secret. I don't think that's too bad. You're looking for measures together for a proposal you want, like paid parental leave. In fact, parties have different views on this. There are still wishes to increase that. That can be all, but then you have to cover it properly. I feel the responsibility of doing so in this ministry. Those are the rules we agreed on. This sometimes leads to measures that I say \"not nice\"......................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................... That's what I'm trying to say here."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-10-13-tweedekamer-6.u313", "speech text": "But you say here that you find it painful. This cannot go hand in hand with the fact that the cabinet said in the written round that it did not consider any other cover measures. That's crazy, isn't it? You take 400 million from the families. That's what you're saying: that's painful, but I didn't see how I could've covered it in any other way without getting those families. Then you obviously want that cover removed from those families. And then you tell Mr Kwint that you don't want to talk about packages, but one second later you start talking about a package. The coalition's line of defense was: it's a package. A package doesn't help people at home. They have something to do with the fact..."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-10-27-tweedekamer-3.u7", "speech text": "Your will is law, Mr. Chairman. While I really find its position on the non-recognition of the elections closer to the Nazis than any PVV position after the Nazi comparison. Under Minister Ollongren, our democracy has been further undermined. The referendum Van Mierlo dreamed of was abolished and destroyed by his own party. Dozens of municipalities have been demolished. The administration is therefore even further away from the citizens. Mayors are still unelected. The splinter party CDA is now at 4% in the polls and yet it holds 30% of the mayor's posts. We still have the First Chamber, where 75 senators together account for 319 side jobs. Under this minister, the ban on lobbying has been abolished which prevents former ministers from becoming active in their policy areas. Our sovereignty has drifted even further towards Brussels. Our Parliament has castrated itself through all these crazy agreements: social agreement, pension agreement, etc. We have the climate tables that only equal-minded people can talk to. They're mostly from GroenLinks. The State now coincides with the party. D66 Minister Van Engelshoven attacks a cartoonist when he depicts her party colleague Kaag negatively. The State thus protects the party interest. Mrs Kaag allowed her Kaagdocumentary officials to negotiate the D66 election spot. And screaming about Poland and crying about Hungary. The essence of totalitarianism is that the State carries out its ideology into the smallest corners of the daily lives of its citizens. For the first time in history, the State and all institutions in the Netherlands share the same ideologies, namely the sacred trinity of the left-wing church. One: the diversity cult. Two: climate-socialism. And three: europhilie. Everywhere, it's gonna knock us down the throat. Let's take a walk around the fields. One. Art is no longer autonomous, but must comply with diversity ideology. Only grant after signing three declarations of loyalty. Art institutions need to map the number of white people so that they can be phased out. Two. Our literature now knows sensitivity readers to delete words that scare people. Three. Our language is being modified. Words like \"allochtoon\" and \"gay\" become taboo. This also reminds us of George Orwell's 1984 book. Under NS director Van Boxtel, member of D66, it has been abolished that the conductor is broadcasting: ladies and gentlemen. Four. Museums lay our heroes from history along the diversity bar. For example, our children learn that Michiel de Ruyter fell off his pedestal. The man who risked his life for decades for us, for the States General, is now persona non grata. Museums abolish the term \"Golden Age.\" Museums are semi-compulsory to hold slavery exhibitions, and of course never carried out by Muslims over centuries of slavery, dragging millions of whites to Arab countries. Five. History is changing. Whites and men, for example, disappear from the canon. Drees had to get out, 'cause white guy. Spinoza had to leave the philosophy canon, because white. This was also the case in the 1984 book. History is changing for the benefit of ideology. Six. Citizens need to change their eating habits. At KLM only vegetarian flies. By 2030, Amsterdammers' diet should be half plant-based. Snack bars must be closed. Stalinist left determines what we get on our plate. D66 now wants houses without a balcony and without a kitchen, which the workers in the GDR were so happy about. Seven. Our parties are ruined. The State wages an open war against Black Piet. As a result, the entire Santa Claus has now disappeared from public life. At the Vrije Universiteit, for example, Christmas has been replaced by the light party. Books with Black Piet in it are removed from libraries and burned. Under a D66 minister, we do book burning again. Eight. Rijkswaterstaat says that in its own organisation \"traditional Dutch values are dominant, for example sobriety, punctuality or directness.\" Yeah, of course you can't do that anymore. Imagine a state water state that's either punctual or sober. If a bridge has to be repaired, you'd rather have someone who isn't punctual. What difference does it make 10 centimeters more or less? The University of Amsterdam believes that people should decolonize themselves. Rationality has been abolished. So we have to get rid of that, they say openly. This illustrates what the cult of diversity really is. Those who abolish rationality abolish science and thus universities. The intention is weakening, hollowing out the West. Each university now employs an army of diversity officers, political commissioners who watch over the party line. And 200 academics in England are already coming up with a petition: they need security during their lectures. Reason? The gender debate. Nine. Citizens are beaten in the face with gender ideology. Lego becomes gender neutral. The D66 Minister of Education believes that people in toy stores should no longer ask if it's for a boy or a girl. Meanwhile, a quarter of the 15-year-olds are pretty much illiterate. Here are the priorities of a dying civilization. Schools get the GenderDoebook from her. Remember, don't talk about male and female reproductive systems. Men and women no longer exist. Rather talk about \"people with a penis\" or \"people with a uterus.\" Question: Would they do that in China, or would they just learn to read and calculate there? Ten. The war on humor. D66 Minister Van Engelshoven announces to talk to Johan Derksen, a journalist, because he makes a joke about gays that she doesn't like. Heaven-tormenting. The University of Groningen is researching humour. There's nothing to laugh about there anymore. Eleven. State broadcasting NPO66 delivers fake news. Information that emits poorly on the diversity cult remains under the hat. In the Marrakesh Treaty, our government promises that media will report positively on mass immigration. Question to this minister: what about her war against the fake news? We saw three pages of De Telegraaf, in which she characterizes fake news as the great danger to state security. In the debate in the Chamber, she was unable to provide examples. Her horn noises ended tragically with radio commercials explaining that not everything on the Internet is true. Gee, we didn't know that! Twelve. Justice has become political. Two Wilders Processes, launched in cooperation with Justice Ministers. What do you mean, separation of powers? He gets a trial, Pechtold doesn't, Samsom doesn't. He talks about Moroccans who have an ethnic monopoly on nuisances. It all makes sense: whoever challenges the cult will be demolished by the judge. See also the premium affair, in which the Council of State, led by D66'er Thom de Graaf, parachuted by Minister Ollongren, continues to snore joyfully, just like the judges. Consequences: 1,100 children placed out of the house. Those judges do wake up to talk left-liberal action groups to the mouth, such as Urgenda climate club, or in the war against Black Piet. The judges oppose the expulsion of criminal foreigners from the country. The police are politicized, as in dictatorships. They are busy with fortifications and visiting mosques. The National Police will take action to apprehend Richard de Mos, alderman of this city. \"There's a criminal organization,\" they scream. As a result, the College of B and W falls. That's a big deal. Two years later, that has not been substantiated at all. It's an unbelievable disgrace. The National Police Department is under Minister Ollongren. Also look at the block frying. For months, they're being chased. Their group apps are being investigated by the police and DNA evidence is being taken from them. Their trial lasts four days, and they all have criminal records. Compare that to Extinction Rebellion. Spoiled white children of wealthy D66s. They're blocking too. But they're good, and so they support the elite. And so justice doesn't do anything. I call the Turks who blocked the Erasmus Bridge. They too are not put in the way of strawbreed. Fourteen. The civil service is also becoming more and more politicised. Here in The Hague they learn not to write \"sir\" or \"ma'am\" anymore, but \"citymate.\" In Amsterdam not \"homosexual\" anymore, but \"pink Amsterdammer.\" The municipality of Amsterdam wants all its 15,000 officials to take a privilege training course. In this way, staff must be aware of their privileged position. In the municipality of Amsterdam, where the left reigns, 30% of the high positions are reserved for non-whites. That's how left-wing groups turn against each other. Fifteen. Our bodies are nationalized. See the mandatory donorship. See the vaccination compulsion. Sixteen. The power of big tech. Facebook and Twitter determine what we can say. Journalists bring news about the cokehead Hunter Biden. Then that newspaper, the New York Post, is removed from Twitter. Next, D66 welcomes two votes in favour. And then the power of the big money. D66 receives a million euros from a tech billionaire and thus buys an election result. In Amsterdam, another D66 billionaire can buy a crucial real estate position on the expensive Zuidas for little money thanks to the city council. The fact that the man has donated a quarter of a million euros to D66 does not play any role, says the secretary of the Art Council, a former chamber member of D66. A professor rightly says: that Zuidas deal has the appearance of conflict of interest. Another billionaire, Soros, finances the war against Black Piet, so NRC Handelsblad reveals. Clubs he finances do not hesitate to commit violence, the AIVD reports. Soros also finances the violent Black Lives Matter. A whole circus has been rigged in the Netherlands by fake action groups funded by the State. Environmental defense gets 60% of its money from the government. Urgenda owes its existence to the Postal Code lottery, which is licensed by the same government. COC is a subdivision of the state, and so it's retracing the cult. Mr. Chairman. Our democracy is going badly and I fear that it will only be worse. Why? Well, that's because the three central values of our elites are basically totalitarian: the diversity cult and the europhily. But also climate socialism is totalitarian. Professor and climate activist Jan Rotmans sees democracy as subordinate to climate goals. He therefore also speaks openly of a \"climate dictatorship.\" Actually, that makes sense, because the Dutch get a personal carbon budget one day, for example. How are you gonna check that out? The only way to do that is through a police state. The climate church gives us four more years to save the world. If you're in it like that, then also logically, democracy is nothing more than a stand-in-the-way, an obstacle to saving the planet. The VVD has finally converted into climate socialism during the General Reviews, so some resistance cannot be expected anymore. In the meantime, a whole class of diversity officers, climate coaches, diversity and inclusion consultants, wind turbine traders, transition advisors and change managers has emerged in the Netherlands, who earn millions by what they call \"sustainable thinking.\" That group must be served and that group will be served. Christopher Lasch wrote it so beautifully: the cultural war is a form of class struggle, and so it is. Henk and Ingrid have to turn in all the time for our enlightened elites. Mr. Chairman. I conclude with the former member of the Chamber of GroenLinks, Zihni \u00d6zdil, who said: \"Their end goal? Let me put it bluntly: the complete cleansing of poor white people from the public life of the Netherlands.\" And so it is. Thank you, Mr President."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-11-02-eerstekamer-5.u104", "speech text": "Yeah, I don't know if it should go exactly along the line of that terminology, which is facts versus judgment, but it's about constantly looking at how hard information is. When we talk about facts, what is the relevance of those facts and what exactly do these facts say? When is there a judgment and whose judgment is that? Is that a judgment based on personal observations of an agent in function or is that a judgment based on signals from others? That kind of context information is indeed relevant to the overall judgment that Justis will have to make. Mr. Chairman. I got into legal protection. It may be with the new vog that Justis is at some point about to refuse a vog, a planned decision. Then there is the possibility of presenting a view. In doing so, the applicant may submit documents which may shed another light on the case. Think for example of positive probation reports, letters of recommendation, diplomas, you name it. It is not a question of proving his or her innocence. The applicant shall be given the opportunity to explain why he disagrees with the intended refusal of the animal. I would like to stress that a decision to issue a vog or not says nothing about the applicant's guilt in committing a criminal offence. The Vog only gives a ruling on judicial and police data at that time, in consideration of possible risks to society. Mr. Chairman. Recourt indicated: legal protection in practice, how does that work? If you want to use that, does that have anything to do with it? After all, if you get a rejection, the job is already forgiven. I see that a little bit differently. An opinion may be submitted in the event of a refusal. That is a process that should actually be possible quite quickly. That view could also be taken into account in the final decision of Justis, giving the applicant the opportunity to make his or her claim. The same applies to the objection phase. In the objection phase, too, this can be done relatively quickly and it can be examined with an employer whether you can wait for that objection phase. Otherwise, it will be as soon as you appeal or appeal. You often talk about longer periods of time, but that is already the case with the standard-vog. There is also the possibility of appeal and appeal, but an employer will not say: we will keep the vacancy open until then. What about the possibility of defense? Mr Janssen said: if you are faced with such a refusal, what are you fighting against or against? What information will you receive as an applicant? The intention to reject it states that, in view of the offences found, Justis sees a risk for the purpose of applying for a bird. It includes the intention to reject it, but also the information on which that proposed rejection is based."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-11-04-tweedekamer-4.u45", "speech text": "The Minister dismisses my plea for a reduction obligation for multinational companies as a'reconciliation of multinationals'. I'll leave those words with him. But that's distracting from the point I wanted to make. There are a lot of polluting companies at the moment. The Innovation Monitor 2021 shows that a lot of these companies still emit CO at the end of this century. This means that we are now moving towards a situation where these companies are doing far too little. If we do not take additional measures, we run the risk of global warming at 2.7 degrees Celsius. That would mean an unliving earth. This also reflects the scale and seriousness of this crisis. I therefore call for additional measures to tackle this pollution. Environmental defense didn't go to court for nothing. Milieudefensie has received a very clear ruling from the judge: Shell needs to reduce extra. My question to the Minister is: what does he think of the proposal not only for Shell but also for other multinational companies? We have to do something extra, don't we? If he does not support this reduction obligation, what is the Minister's proposal to ensure that there is an additional reduction in multinational companies that are still polluting?"}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-11-09-tweedekamer-18.u57", "speech text": "12 billion, 649 million, 581 thousand and 965 euros. That is what has been paid by tenants so far for landlord tax, over 12.5 billion. It's such a big amount that it's almost abstract. But it's very concrete for the people who pay it, the people who hit it. It means that tens of thousands of new social housing units have not been built, that waiting lists of more than ten years are no longer unusual. It means higher rents, people who can't pay their rent anymore, who have to think about every dime every month. And it means a worse quality of homes. It means people who are still in a wind-up house and do not dare to turn on the stove because of the high gas prices. Removing more than 12.5 billion from social tenants is antisocial, it has caused enormous misery, it has increased the housing crisis and it has to stop. That is why we are putting forward this proposal again. But even though it increases the housing crisis, the VVD continues. This should, of course, have been the debate where we would be discussing a proposal to abolish the landlord's tax. After all, the Constitution states that sufficient housing is the subject of public concern. And there has also been a large majority in the House of Representatives for a long time for the abolition of that landlord's tax. Only the VVD and, forward, the SGP, are still in favour of the levy. We should have talked about abolition because it's bizarre to hide you in the midst of the biggest housing shortage since World War II behind a formation with exactly the same parties that formed the previous cabinet. We need to talk about abolition because we are wasting precious time that we also need to take other tax measures against the housing crisis. During the General Reviews, a reduction in the landlord's tax was proudly presented. A reduction is not enough, but that reduction is already falling. The WOZ value is increasing, which means that corporations have to pay more landlord tax again. In the written answer we saw a defense of the cabinet that is truly inimitable. On the one hand, on page 42 it says that maximizing the landlord's tax on the agreed amount costs the cabinet money. That's bizarre, because the high rental charge hasn't been estimated at all. On the other hand, on page 45 of the reply, I'm just saying, because then you can check out the fact that the higher landlord's tax would be good for the corporations. This is absurd as it is. In that answer we also see a kind of juggling with years. On one page the tax will be back at last year's level in 2030, but on the other page it will be back in 2025. At the same time, the cabinet admits honestly that this will cause further problems for corporations. Even if the entire reduction is used, there can be no sufficient housing. The answer: what is it? Why these inimitable answers to a serious, if you want technical debate? Why not admit that it was just a really bad idea to get that landlord tax back on? Why, I ask my colleagues in the Chamber, will a majority be held hostage by a VVD minority? Why is that more important than tackling the housing crisis? In the reply we see that there is still no real solution to the other taxes paid by tenants, namely the tax on profits and the tax on tax avoidance multinationals. And if tenants aren't something, then it is. Finally, I would like to talk about affordability. The landlord levy was introduced in the economic crisis. Tenants paid the last crisis and they still pay it. But tenants are now threatening to pay for the next crisis, namely the energy crisis and rising inflation. After a long battle, rents in the social rental sector have now been frozen until July. And in the free sector, rent increases are limited to inflation plus 1%. But the rents are threatening to rise rapidly from July because of rising inflation. And the law for a one-time rent cut, which was part of the plan last year, ends. Meanwhile, high energy prices already put many tenants in trouble. What's the Cabinet gonna do? Is it going to lower the rents? Or is it at least going to extend the rent freeze for corporations as well as for commercial landlords? Is the Cabinet going to extend the law for a one-time rent reduction? Is it going to lower the threshold in the rent payment so that very low-income tenants don't get into trouble? Will the cabinet also make the rent allowance accessible for rents above the liberalisation limit? Because tenants with low income but high rents need this extra badly. These are just a few proposals that we can really make at the end of this housing crisis. The question is: are we going to be held hostage by the narrow part of the VVD, or are we going to take real action? Thank you."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-11-10-tweedekamer-3.u9", "speech text": "The last question. This is very easy to solve. We have a defense vision. There's content in there, there's amounts in there. If we take this whole thing seriously, take the Constitution seriously and take it seriously by adding a few billion to it, as in the SGP election programme at least, we are out of the question. Can the PVV support that?"}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-11-10-tweedekamer-3.u27", "speech text": "I thought we were here for the defense budget. A lot of soldiers are watching this debate. Now we see a small debate on Islam. I find it all moving, but..."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-11-10-tweedekamer-3.u121", "speech text": "I understand that, but I would find it very unwise to say to the cabinet: do it quickly. If you're doing well with the European Strategic Compass, you'll finally have a good basis for the conversation to be complete. I myself have said very little about specialization for years, because the boys happen to be the guys who always said, \"Oh yes, Mrs. Belhaj? What are you going to delete? Are you against the Navy? Are you against...?\" Those are impossible choices. I thought, \"I need to be smarter about that.\" I need something, namely facts and statements, to be able to have that conversation. I do not believe that a politician should say: do two fewer planes. Or: the army can leave. Or, \"Cyber.\" I don't think that's my job as a politician. My job as a politician is to give direction, to indicate how I see security policy politically. Then the military say, \"We want everything.\" Then I say: well, we are trying again, because 'everything' is not going to work; this and this is happening in Europe. Then I will answer the question again as to what we need as the Netherlands. I'd rather see that, because then it's not about the tools and resources that the armed forces want to deploy, they know that very well, but then it's about what smart tools are to address the threats. Otherwise, I might do some really weird things. That's why the Strategic Compass is very important. First we have the overview and then we say to the defense: say it, fill it in, and then we say what we think. That's how I see it. Sometimes it just takes a little longer, but that's okay."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-11-10-tweedekamer-3.u137", "speech text": "It is good that you do not run away from that, because it also depends on credibility. You signed the previous coalition agreement, which, in terms of defence, did not end up with anything. There's gonna be a new coalition agreement soon. So what's the guarantee to the defense staff that it's gonna work out now? The VVD already had a credibility problem, but of course the CDA is not much behind in that. So how do you deal with that?"}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-11-10-tweedekamer-6.u3", "speech text": "When I was a kid, I used to love chess very much. I was just thinking about that during the debate. Because if there is a budget where you have to look very forward, besides a lot of things in politics, it is, of course, Defence. That is also a bit the theme of my contribution today. Because today's cabinet produced a Defence Vision 2035, which has been discussed before today, but at the same time no money has been allocated to carry out this vision as a whole and no choices have been made, if you think: with a limited budget we have to do what we can do. There are no choices made that GroenLinks considers important, and then it is about specialisation, which has been discussed earlier today. It seems that the rule in the defence sector is, above all, not to look too far ahead, not to look beyond what is strictly necessary. I am going to use this debate today to look a little further than just tomorrow. I saw a message from my predecessor on this file which said, in response to what he read about this debate: so little has changed. I recognize that in many of the debates we are having here, but that is not the intention, because we did not go into politics for that. When it comes to the issue of military specialization, I mentioned the motion that was adopted last year to develop scenarios and to see where you would have to specialize as a military force. The Minister says that he is not going to carry out the motion, because it is or should be a gradual process and that specialization should be done in consultation with allies. But GroenLinks doesn't deny that at all. That gradual process must take place, in consultation with allies, but it must start sometime. The development of scenarios of options that are obvious for the Netherlands could be helpful in this respect, and we could have the debate on this. What does the Netherlands want? I would therefore ask the Minister to carry out the motion and come forward with detailed scenarios before Christmas. One of the specializations that GroenLinks sees in front of him is cyber, a point where it seems that the DOD is afraid to think through. The old-fashioned army of Army, Air Force and Navy is not up to the threats of the future. Cyber defense is crucial if we want to keep our infrastructure safe over the next few decades and prevent major military conflicts. But Defense prevents a political debate on the extent of our cyber defense by keeping the budgets for cyber capacity, STPD and Cyber Command a secret. What enemies could read from these budgets is still unclear after several questions I asked about this. Is the Minister prepared to come up with a good argument or else simply make the budgets public? I am considering a motion on this point. Then there's the process around the airport decisions, another point where the DOD seems blind to the risks. Defense wants to fly more over De Peel and Gilze-Rijen, despite strong resistance from local communities and a tight lack of space for the extra nitrogen deposition in Brabant. To ask what the defence will do when the airport decisions ricochet off, the Minister's answer is short: we will see that again. We don't think that's good enough, because governance is forward-looking. Just make sure the plans are ready for if it doesn't work out. Because fair is fair: that's a pretty big chance. Just make sure that there is no great delay and social unrest when the SMART-L radar is placed in Herwijnen, purely because Defence is too stubborn to adjust time. I'd like a response from the Minister. Mr. Chairman. Finally, a glimmer of light. Defence has 30,000 hectares of natural areas, which are also being practiced. In the written round, I asked about the role that the areas can play in the challenges facing the Netherlands in the field of biodiversity. The minister said he's coming with a report. My question is when can we expect this report? Thank you."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-11-10-tweedekamer-6.u29", "speech text": "Mr. Chairman. Mrs Belhaj no longer has any interruptions, but let me just say right away that I have only been a member of the SGP and that I have been for about 20 years. Okay, Mr. Chairman. Then the contents. What is the core task of our armed forces? If you ask a lot of people, they might say something like: bring peace. But that is wrong, because the core task of our defense is to fight, fight, apply responsible violence. The aim is, of course, security and peace, but that is not the primary task. I fear that we have sometimes forgotten this after 75 years of peace in our country, that we have forgotten that the world is a dangerous place where you are lagging behind 1-0 without hard power, hard power, evil forces, so without good counterpower. Why else have we refused for decades to give Defence the resources needed to fight for peace? In this respect, we support the Minister's call for these billions to be added to the defence budget. In this respect, I would also like to refer to the motion that we tabled as a SGP, which was supported by VVD, CDA and Christian Union, so I am confident that it will be moving in the right direction in the near future. That motion was about extra billions as a priority for the cabinet negotiations and the coalition agreement. We trust that the next cabinet will take seriously the appeal of the Minister and the motion to which I refer and that it will deliver. Because that is what we owe our Constitution, our security, our military, our allies and also the international legal order. Mr. Chairman. Having said this, let me say that the SGP is very concerned about the delay in replacing submarines. There is no doubt that this intelligence and weapons platform is crucial, given the global geopolitical threats. That cabinet and chamber have repeatedly expressed the wish for a process of replacement which ensures strategic autonomy and which does an essential justice to the Dutch maritime industry, is also clear in my opinion. That is why I ask the Minister: will he ask the competing yards to show them how they involve the Dutch maritime industry in the design, development, construction and, above all, the maintenance of submarines, and speed up the acquisition process on this basis? I'd like to hear the Minister's answer. Mr. Chairman. Then another crucial capacity that is also of tactical and strategic importance, namely tactical and strategic air transport. Transport helicopters active in many places, up to and including the Caribbean. In crisis situations, military weapons, supplies or evacuations come from a to b.C-130 devices were active in Afghanistan and also in Mali. However, I think we have seen together that the taxation of defence is also very high in this area. We also discussed this during the last discussion, the technical briefing and the debate on Mali. My question to the Minister is whether he agrees that there is a need to increase these capacities. Would he like to identify the needs and the costs and benefits thereof? Another focus is operational support and the build-up of sufficient stocks of ammunition and spare parts. Without this lubricating oil between the wheels, the whole machine comes to a standstill. My question to the Minister is therefore: is it true that this oil alone will require an additional 800 million in structural terms? And it's an easy question, I understand that, but it's a serious question. How does the Minister ensure that the necessary amount actually gets there? Mr. Chairman. The SGP Group is pleased that we are going to achieve the 2% investment ratio agreed in NATO. 20%, by the way. Continuous developments in the world require continuous innovation. Defence and industry can and must complement each other. Can the Minister state what progress has been made on the implementation of our motion for a resolution on promoting cooperation between defence and industry? Mr. Chairman. This was all about stuff, but most important is the factor with which our armed forces really stand or fall. And I'm lucky to see that in the Chamber. These are the people. Good and motivated military personnel are crucial, also for the preparation and employability. Defence must create the conditions for this. There have been many opportunities in this area for many years, but unfortunately these opportunities are still there. Mr. Chairman. I would like to focus on three points. First of all, I am concerned about the maintenance of staff. Each organisation needs old-timers with experience. That field experience is definitely needed at the Department of Defense. Moreover, we must also note that recruitment of newcomers is expensive. Technical people are scarce. My question is: what about the roll-out of the new staff model? Is it really a market-based salary and good opportunities for growth? Mr. Chairman. The second point I want to make here is: ensure a good governance model at the top. I do not think it would be desirable for the Commander of the Armed Forces, the CDS, to have only an executive role and not a policy role. My question to the Minister is whether he agrees and whether he wishes to reconsider the current control model on this point. Mr. Chairman. Thirdly, I would like to say that we must have a stronger relationship between the Ministry of Defence and the Ministry of Youth. Militarymen are famous for their disciplinary skills under the motto \"knock on the shoulder or kick under hollow.\" In my opinion, these skills can have great added value in dealing with problematic behaviour by young people who risk slipping into crime. Previously, the project \"The Challenge\" was set up at this point, but that was unfortunately reduced later. My question to the Minister is whether he agrees that this good strengthening of cooperation could be there. My question is also whether he wants to allow a pilot in which veterans are used for discipline and rehabilitation of the group of young people I have just appointed. Mr. Chairman. Finally. The core values of the army are courage, dedication and resilience. Let us, as politicians, have the courage to take the armed forces seriously, even if it does not produce the popularity prize. I wonder if we would allow our commitment to the country's interests to go above party politics. And let us also make amidst the shifting tectonic plates in world politics with resilience and well-thought-out choices so that, when it comes to it, we can fight for peace. I very much hope and express the wish that the next cabinet will actually show this statemanship. Thank you."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-11-10-tweedekamer-6.u32", "speech text": "That's a nice question. I could answer it very briefly with \"yes.\" That is my first answer. I would like to give a very brief explanation. It is, of course, a very difficult world, a very difficult one in that respect. I think there aren't many people who are really good at it. You want the best people in this place, of course. Maybe that paycheck building's pretty tight. We were in Israel a few years ago. That's where you see the combination of business and defense. There is a model with high-quality technological knowledge, which they sometimes use in defence and which they are then allowed to market again. But that has its advantages again. I would like to give that to the Minister. I will do so through Mr Van Wijngaarden. Maybe there would be a chance to pick this up too. But again, nice question. And the answer to that is \"yes.\""}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-11-11-tweedekamer-26.u7", "speech text": "Madam President. I would like to begin by expressing my thanks for dealing with the Defence budget 2022 yesterday. There was a great commitment and, above all, a great appreciation for the men and women who are willing to commit themselves, to risk the freedom of their 17,5 million compatriots, and to want to commit themselves and run the risk of a better world, because that is what is at issue every day. I wholeheartedly share the great appreciation that has been expressed. Of the qualifications that have passed, one remark by Mr Van Wijngaarden remained with me most. He said, \"We've got to get to DOD first and get to the point where we have a chance to get to the plus.\" I think that's a very good characteristic of what we're doing right now. Luckily, this is already happening. During the past cabinet period, almost at the end of this period, we have managed to increase the Defence budget by EUR 2.1 billion. That is, of course, a substantial improvement. For a small part, we are also able to catch up with the biggest delays that are common to the Defense Department. But we must also realise that a large proportion of the 2.1 billion has been used and specifically allocated to strengthen military capacity and weapons systems. An example of this is that nine additional F-35s have been purchased. That was also important, because the backbone of our Defence Organization, of our armed forces, is strong. It is very good to keep it strong too, so that when we go back to that plus, as Mr Van Wijngaarden said, we also have a good basis. Because there have been a number of qualifications of Defence as an almost soul-blowing organization, I think it is good to put something against that. I think the Defense Department is a giant who can get back to power even more quickly if it gets the possibilities. But at the moment, I think the DOD already has a very impressive backbone. Once the F-35s are handed over, we'll have 46 fighter planes of the most modern kind. We have different types of helicopters, such as battle helicopters and transport helicopters; together there are 80. We're about to have four unmanned aircraft. We have a total of 21 surface ships and submarines, and there are another 3 in order. We have the Marine Corps, which, apart from its own humanities, also has its own range of transport options. The same goes, of course, for the Corps of Command. We have the STUDY and the Royal Marechaussee. And with the army we still have two special Patriot installations, which over the years have proved their worth in the defense regime. We have 24 armored haters, there are 6,000 vehicles in order from the Army and we have 700 armoured vehicles. All in all, there's a very strong backbone at the DOD. What matters now is that we get all those things filled with trained, trained and available staff and that we also get the material readiness of everything we have in order. That is now, for the coming period, the great challenge. But there is a very strong basis to build on. Mr. Chairman. Defence is defence, defence of what we have built together and the generations before us in our country: our freedom, our rule of law and everything we would like to pass on to the next generations, which we grant the same. I have already said that with our armed forces we have a unique organisation with unique resources. It is an organization which, apart from everything I have just mentioned in terms of resources, has 41,000 tough men and women who are willing to stand as soldiers when it really comes to it. They do so together with their civilian colleagues, who also play a very important role in the Defence Organisation, and with the reserveists. The 6,500 reserveists form the Dutch Defence Organisation with the military and the civilian colleagues. That's what the defense budget is about, which you're handling this week. In a world dominated by the United States, China and Russia, our armed forces cannot defend us on their own. We cannot do this together with the other European countries. To this end, Europe is not in a position to be militaryly and politically divided. I will come back to the European Union and its distribution in Europe. The Netherlands and the other European countries depend on the United States. Fortunately, the United States has been integrated into NATO. It is a cooperation in the alliance of North American and European countries that is capable of defending us, defending us in Europe. The United States accounts for 70% of NATO capacity. This costs them 3.5% of their gross domestic product per year. The defence expenditure of the European countries is far behind that. That is, of course, a threat to the alliance. That is why the NATO countries agreed a standard of not 3.5%, but 2%. In 2014, they agreed to grow there in Wales in ten years. Our percentage is 1.5%. If we don't do something in the next few years, we'll fall below 1.4% in the next few years. Compliance with the agreement we made in 2014 to reach 2% in 2024 would cost the Netherlands more than 5 billion a year. If we do not want to get out of hand in Europe and reach the average of the European NATO countries, it would cost us some 4 billion extra per year. But that doesn't mean we're here yet. If we have done so and we are all in Europe at 2% and are somewhat more in balance with the United States, then we must realise that the United States believes that Europe must first and foremost take care of its own defence. This requires an effective European defence society, which is still insufficient. In the meantime, America's defence attention is increasingly drawn to China. China is the second economy of the world, has the largest navy in the world and is rapidly developing the land and air force. They are also rapidly producing nuclear weapons. China is also relevant to the European defence, which I will come up with later, but first about Russia. We experience this threat from Russia every day: in the air and at sea; in the corridor of the Baltic countries, Belarus and Ukraine, but also to the south of Europe. Russia uses hybrid warfare, for example by making great use of disinformation to disrupt democracies. Where European countries in the Sahel region are committed to stability and security, Russia is doing exactly the opposite. That threat we are facing is also and increasingly a cyber threat and also a threat in space. Businesses, knowledge institutions and public authorities in Western countries face cyber attacks from Russia and China on a daily and large scale. The purpose of these cyber attacks is to steal information and disrupt stability in our area. Where our physical defence is still credible thanks to NATO and the United States, our cyber defence is not yet, in my opinion, and that is a great concern. I can tell you that in the six, almost seven weeks I've been back on the DOD, I've been working on that cyber threat almost every day. How can we resist them as well as possible? The same goes for our defense for what's in space; trying to resist as best we can. In space, we have set up Western satellite systems for communication and observation, but they are vulnerable to competing satellite systems set up by Russia and China. One is intended to disrupt our satellite systems and the other is about the possibility of firing satellites that they are not on. That is also a threat, far from our bed, but therefore no less real. The defence organisation is also needed every day in the Netherlands. Corona showed it to me, too. If there's a pandemic, then defense is of great value. We need to be able to respond to this at certain times by the civil authorities. This also applies to the Netherlands when there is natural violence, such as in Limburg, but also in Haiti and Albania. Then we are also there to join in on an international scale. What can we, as a government, as a parliament, expect from our armed forces, our defence organisation? Firstly, that is what we have put in our Constitution: the defence of the European territory of the Netherlands and of the Dutch countries and public bodies in the Caribbean. The protection and promotion of the international legal order and stability is the second point in the Constitution. And the third is to support the civilian authorities whenever necessary. Secondly, we can expect our armed forces to ensure that we fulfil our international obligations, particularly in the NATO context, towards the United States. I say it quite frankly, and I have already written it to the Chamber: the defence organisation cannot now meet these legitimate expectations. The organisation is vulnerable because material readiness is below 50% and employability is too low. There is insufficient investment in staff, in renewal, in sustainability of housing, in practicability. There is also insufficient investment in operational support, in stocks, in conservation and in IT. That is the situation at the moment. And I'm not talking about investing more in cyber and space, as I just mentioned. Defense needs to recover. As Van Wijngaarden said, defence must come out of the blue and then it must be renewed. And one can't do without the other. Everything that needs to be done is, of course, directly linked to the financial resources, with the deficit of 4 or 5 billion a year. It is just how you want to see it; the European average or NATO-2%. The expectations we, the government and the parliament, have of our armed forces, have never been lowered. I also think that lowering those expectations is not a real option. In those years, the DOD tried to keep all the balls in the air and fill one hole with another. There is no \"no\" in the Defense Department, so if something is expected of us, we try to get that to the left or right with some sticking and cutting as well as possible. I don't think it's going to be like this anymore. I think that if our people are asked to do their dangerous work, they deserve to be well trained and trained, to have access to the equipment, equipment, armament, support and information they need and to be well rewarded. Mr President, this is an introduction. I would now like to turn to the questions put by the Members of Parliament and the comments that have been made. I will try to combine them, but I always do so as much per spokesperson as possible."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-11-11-tweedekamer-26.u14", "speech text": "I was afraid I'd get a position. In this case! Mr. Chairman. I find the Minister's answer curious for two reasons. One. He knows as well as I do that in the short term not EUR 4 billion will be added to the defense. There won't be any in the short term. For that reason alone, you should start thinking about an alternative scenario. Then the other reason I find it strange. The Netherlands, of course, cooperates with other countries. So why keep doing everything? That is a weak spot of Defence: and fighter jets, as well as tanks, and submarines, are leased tanks; I know that as well as cyber, very relevant. You can see it beeps and cracks. I would like to comment on those two points."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-11-11-tweedekamer-26.u47", "speech text": "You've got to do it in a targeted manner. You shouldn't go where it's not necessary, take money and bring it to places where it's necessary, too little. We're gonna find out very precisely. We are creating a new wage building, in which it has been justified and developed in a responsible manner. That will certainly be shared with the Chamber, so that Mr Jansen can check it. Mr. Chairman. Mr Van Wijngaarden spoke about giving up defence expenditure with the economy. I think that is best done, and I think that is what he means by using the NATO standard, the agreement we have made, as a guideline. I think that's how we should do it. But for a good defense organization, as I would very much like it to be, we need suitable personnel who will probably be employed by us. We also need equipment. It must be invested in the long term. The equipment we have sometimes last 20, 30 years, but I also know examples that it lasts almost 50 years. We must all make long-term commitments. For the Defense Department, it's important not to swing, but the economy can swing. It is most responsible to have long-term security, but as a guideline we can use the agreement we made in NATO. I think that is also the intention of Mr Van Wijngaarden. Mr Van Wijngaarden also asked for a ranking of the GDP rates of NATO countries to be included in the budget every year. We did, but apparently that wasn't enough. We would like to discuss again with him and the Chamber exactly how this should be done and how it could be done better. On page 11 of the draft budget, Figure 3 shows the development of the European NATO average. On page 12 in Figure 4, the development of the gross domestic product percentage and the ranking of the European NATO counterparts is shown. We thought it was so good, but if we can do better, we'd be happy to. Mrs Piri, Mr Ceder and Mr Jasper van Dijk asked about the growing importance of the cyber domain in relation to the extra money that I believe Defence needs. I think that's quite right. I have already said that I have been working on this every day for the past six or seven weeks. There is the very special situation that we in the Netherlands are complying with laws. We adhere to privacy provisions and monitor the intelligence and security services. Those are all kinds of limitations. On the other hand, there are countries where privacy does not play any role, where ethics does not play a role and where a supervisor is not involved, and who only attack us to push things further. I'm really worried about the difference between those attacks and the defense. That's not right. We really need to get the leg back on track to get this right. I wonder if it is not necessary, as we have deterrents in our nuclear capabilities and in our regular defence capabilities, to create something of deterrent in that cyber domain. We should not just wait and see what comes to us and try to defend ourselves as best we can. We must also be able to attack if we wish, in such a way that others see it as a threat. This will also make it easier for us to keep them away from us than is the case at the moment. So I think that defence should invest, not only in the current but also in the future threats, and that is absolutely part of the investment in cyber and space. We're not doing nothing about it. STIVD is a growing organisation, as the number of employees grows by 10% every year. I think it's an organization that's doing very well. However, this organisation has great limitations and I would like that to be looked at critically. Furthermore, we have Defense Cyber Command. I understand that Mr Van Wijngaarden and others have been there. I think that these are very important organisations for us in the cyber field in the years to come to do what is also in the interest of the 17,5 million Dutch people in this area. 41.000 Dutch soldiers are working every day for this. Mrs Piri and Mr Boswijk also asked about the results of investments in recent years. I just said something about that."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-11-11-tweedekamer-26.u50", "speech text": "I will look into this in the light of Mr Boswijk's comment and I will be returning to the Chamber in some time. Right now, the STIVD and the Defense Cyber Commando, because they have attached good people to them, are very capable of doing those things that will allow us to do more about our cyber defense than is possible at the moment. I've already indicated what the restrictions are. In my view, it is very important that we ensure effective supervision of the security services, the STVD and AIVD, but we should also allow them to do what is important for the Dutch people within that effective supervision, namely to ensure that there is a real defence against such attacks. But I would like to take up Mr Boswijk's point. I'll get back to you on that."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-11-11-tweedekamer-26.u80", "speech text": "Yes. I will continue to do so on Monday when I go to Brussels to talk about this, together with the Foreign Minister. Mr. Chairman. We've had all the necessary exchanges on staff. Important improvements are needed, as I have already said, but a lot has already been done. We call that the square meters per military as far as alloy is concerned. Mr. Jansen said some very critical things about that. During the past cabinet period, a billion euros have been released to improve the barracks and the alloy. Wi-Fi is available everywhere; everyone has a mobile phone. We've done a lot of equipment for the individual military. The security of the military has improved. We have set up a management board and an inspection. In all areas where attention should be paid, they are working on this. Those are very necessary things. If you, as a large organization, think that something needs attention, you should organize it as well. That's what we did with the board and the inspection. Working conditions and allowances have improved. Training claims have been awarded and improvements in pensions have been made. There has been a 6.3% increase in salary and a full end-of-year allowance has been achieved. I believe that the figure of 2% per year has been increased to almost 9% per year, which means that a full monthly amount can be paid at the end of the year. All the things that have been done have led to a 12% increase in salaries across the board and a structural investment of 150 million in training, pension systems and allowances in particular. But we're definitely not with that. I have already indicated this; I will not repeat that. What is needed is a new \"wage building\"; that is a good word for a better reward. What is also necessary is a modern staff policy. As I said, it must be aimed at giving people the individual attention they want and the right to develop. This is important for the organisation as a whole. Of course, this new staff model is not falling out of the sky. Mr. Stoffer and Mr. Boswijk asked about that. That is something that is introduced in steps. It is expected that we will be able to achieve this by 2025. So that's in the next cabinet period. It's a little easier to realize the payroll building. That's what we've been talking about. Mr Boswijk said that Defence wants to be a good employer, but that the staff are still out of a collective agreement. I think we should say a little more about this collective agreement. Like the police and the government officials of the cabinet, we are given what the wage room for a new year is. It has to be filled in. That's what we do with the unions. Together with the unions, we've been looking at what we can do with the wage space available to the Defense Department this year. It is agreed that a part is done structuralally in total 1.4% structurally and that a part is done once only. This amounts to \u20ac1,000, which will be paid this year. All in all, this has meant that the improvements made for defence personnel are between 2% and 4%. That is what has been achieved in terms of improvements. For example, the 1.4% and the one-off \u20ac1,000 are compared to the collective agreement of the municipalities, and it is said that that is 3.9%. Well, then we're really comparing apples to pears. The municipalities have concluded a two-year collective agreement. For the year 2021, they did not give the first increase until 1 December. For the people in the municipalities, therefore, there has been hardly any improvement in the current year. There has been that improvement in the defense department. The municipalities have anticipated this, but for the next year and, I hope, the following year, they will also conclude a new collective agreement with the unions. We'll see how far we can get with that."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-11-11-tweedekamer-26.u86", "speech text": "I don't have a plan B. My plan is to ensure and manage that we are no longer below the European average of NATO countries in the next cabinet period, and that we are close to that 2% of NATO in the next cabinet period. And if that is made possible, if that money becomes available, it will have to be deployed across a broad front, but the improvement of the wage building for our staff is a major priority for me. How exactly we are going to translate this into the next cabinet period will be worked out in the Defence Note, which will be drawn up immediately after the cabinet formation, and where the Chamber can see how that money will be distributed and at what rate it will be available to staff. Mrs Van der Plas asked me if I could justify morally that soldiers are under the minimum wage. And Mr Van Dijk proposed to bring the minimum wage to \u20ac14 per hour. The lowest amounts for military personnel are indeed below the minimum wage, but this has been compensated by the guarantee allowance. Moreover, the military receive other allowances which are not included in the basic salary, so in practice there is no situation that there is working below the minimum wage. That is not the case for anyone. But it's not a situation I'm saying can stay that way. I think there is a need for improvement. A minimum wage of \u20ac14 per hour comes from the collective agreement of the municipalities. I don't know what we're gonna come up with if we get extra money available and that's gonna be used for the payroll building. I don't know what's gonna be the end of it. I understand what Mr Van Dijk's idea is about this, but I would not like to anticipate it now. First we have that money, then we see how best to divide it. As I have already said, the current wage structure has an unbalanced distribution. I really think it's necessary to improve that. And I really think it is necessary to ensure that this improvement in the wage building is accompanied by a new HR policy, a new staff policy for the employees, especially the military staff of Defence. Mr. Chairman. Then I come to Mr Eppink. He inquired about the AOW-hole of former soldiers. He was talking about \"striking cases.\" It's good to take a moment to think about what we're talking about. We are talking in particular about the military who retired between the 52nd and 58th. They assumed that they would receive an ABP pension at 65 years. They also assumed that they would receive AOW from that moment on. Later that AOW age was increased. This means that until the regular retirement age the military received their own benefit, the Benefits- orphaned military, the UGM. There was this Disability- orphaned military, but the AOW fell away because people thought, \"I've been getting AOW since I was 65 years old.\" That was actually 66 years old. I'm assuming. So they missed one year of AOW. I say to Mr. Eppink, the defense has fully reimbursed for all the military involved. We've made an arrangement, the AOW-hole compensation scheme. That means that this AOW will be reimbursed with a specific benefit for all military personnel. I do not know if there have been any more poignant cases. I can't really think of that myself. But let's say it is. A separate committee has been set up for this. That can be recited to that committee. Then that committee will assess it. That will then end up with me. There's something special about that. This applies to the soldiers who retired early, between 52 and 58 years old. Although they do not receive an AOW from the age of 65, their ABP pension may take effect on that date. But there are a number of people in that group who say: but we prefer that our ABP pension should not go into our 65th, but that this benefit orphaned military workers will continue to go on until the new AOW age. And why do they want to do that? First of all, they can build up an additional pension in that year. Secondly, the ABP pension is higher if you allow it to start a year later. And third, the UGM, the benefit orphaned military, has been indexed and the ABP pension has not been for ten years. That is why the retired military say: we prefer it to go that way. But the intention is not to settle anything now other than what was originally assumed. Originally, the ABP pension was assumed to be at the age of 65. It's gonna stay that way. And it was assumed that they were getting AOW at the age of 65. That is what we are compensating for with the AOW-hole compensation scheme. So I think that we, as the Defence Department, have resolved this in a very neat way and that this has been done in all reasonable ways."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-11-11-tweedekamer-26.u96", "speech text": "The space available to the state officials in the police, the Empire and the Defense Department is equal. There are negotiations in the different sectors on exactly how to fill that out, on which dates structuralally or once. That's what we've been exploring with the unions. We have also set that maximum level together with the unions. I think we did that in a good way. I'm not satisfied with what's going to come out in the end, all in all, for the defense people. I believe that an improvement in the wage structure is needed. I think there should be a better staff policy. I also believe that efforts should be made to establish a good collective agreement for 2022 and 2023, including on the basis of the scope provided for in the new coalition agreement. That's what I'm trying to do. And more generally with regard to the unions, I think that the unions have a strong position in the defence sector, that they are involved in many matters, that they are constructive and that we have achieved a great deal together. I would like to maintain that and we will continue to do our best to do so."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-11-11-tweedekamer-26.u185", "speech text": "Mr Fritsma also asked whether those nine additional F-35s we bought could be cancelled. I have already indicated that we are not going to do so, because those nine additional F-35s are a significant reinforcement of the armed forces. It's been decided. They've been ordered. As far as I'm concerned, we're just gonna leave it at that. Mr Van Wijngaarden asked about unmanned weapons systems. Mr Van Dijk also mentioned this. In particular, it was a question of whether human control would remain in the picture. That human control certainly remains in the picture, because according to international law, this type of weapon is always fully and meaningfully under human control. The Netherlands uses this as a framework. If we work with weapons systems we have recently ordered four Reapers and the first one has been delivered and will soon be used..................................................................................................................................................... The Netherlands is also committed to making international agreements and frameworks for the use of such weapons. We also asked for advice from the International Affairs Advisory Council. So we will be constantly working on this subject, from the background that we believe that meaningful human control is a prerequisite for this type of unmanned weapon systems. Mr Stoffer and Mr Van Haga spoke about supplies in the defence sector. I have already indicated that there are major deficits there. The first step in the right direction has been taken with the sum of 300 million, which has become available with the Hermans motion. This has enabled us to take steps. I have already said that we want to raise the ammunition supply as quickly as possible. I have also indicated that major additional investments are needed in order to achieve operational support and deployment stocks in such a way that the readiness and employability of the armed forces will reach the level where we want them to be able to fulfil our mission in NATO. Mr Van Wijngaarden spoke on the handling of export licences and on access to financial services. He did so in the light of the criticism of the defence industry. The concerns about this are known to me. In this respect, I do not want to anticipate questions that I have received from the CDA on the potential impact of European regulation and on access to financial services. With the Defence Industry Strategy in 2018, the Cabinet identified the knowledge, technology and capabilities of the Dutch industry and knowledge institutions needed to protect the essential interests and national security of the Netherlands at all times. It also established what is needed as a basic defence technology industry in the Netherlands. I am convinced that the importance of this robust Dutch defence technology industrial base is unabated and that it is very important to maintain it. We, as Defence, are constantly looking to make the most of the opportunities we see for doing so. Mr. Chairman. I'll get to the real estate. Mr. Jansen had been to a barracks and he described what it looked like there. He was very critical about that. Defense has a huge backlog in real estate, real estate. Mr Jansen has rightly pointed this out. During the past cabinet period, we have allocated more than EUR 1 billion for this purpose. That money is invested in the improvement of barracks and in the improvement of the alloy. That's what's needed. The start has already been made and will be continued with this amount. It's not nearly enough. If you look at it over a longer period of about 20 years, I think we don't need a billion, but an amount in the order of 5 billion or 6 billion to catch up. I also think we should look at this more broadly. We need to see what kind of real estate Defense has, what kind of real estate needs to be maintained, what kind of real estate can be upgraded and what new needs to be realized. If we do that, we also need to consider how possible a shift of locations towards the Randstad can take place, because most of the new forces we get come from the Randstad. It is important to take that into account. To put it more broadly, I think it's important that we focus on defense locations. If you have many scattered locations across the country, and you constantly move soldiers from one position to another, this means they have to move and their partner loses the job. That is not a desirable situation. If you concentrate the locations, if you bring them together, then a military can do its job in an environment for much longer and also perform different functions. This is for her or him, but also for her or his partner. That's what we're doing when it comes to real estate. I have already said that I think that the real estate to be divested can be of great importance for the housing inventory that exists in the Netherlands, as well as for nature restoration and nitrogen control. Ms Belhaj addressed the issue of sustainability. She asked the Department of Defense to report annually on fuel and energy consumption. We have set targets for this in the defence sector. The target for reducing dependence on fossil fuels is that it was reduced by 20% by 2030 and 70% by 2050. That's very ambitious. We also go a long way in that, for example by mixing biofuel with fossil fuel. If you are going to refuel with your car, as far as it is not an electric car, there is a maximum of 10% biofuel in the petrol. At DOD, we've brought that to 20%. In this way we are also taking steps in the right direction. We report on this every year. Since 2019, we have reported in the annual report on energy consumption, fuel types, gas consumption, electricity consumption and CO emissions. We intend to continue to do so in the years to come. The Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance has asked about the challenges facing Defence in the field of biodiversity, and it wants to report on them. I think it is important to come up with the information that GroenLinks is asking for. I suggest that we do that in two stages. The first is that we ask the Rijksvoestgoedbedrijf to give an overview of what has been monitored so far and what the results are. We will then produce this overview every year at Accountability Day. Then we will see what is not yet being monitored and what is not yet being investigated. We will then try to estimate how much time it takes to get that picture. I will use both tracks to provide the information that Mrs Bromet asked for. Mrs Bromet also spoke about the airport decisions. I think she is referring in particular to De Peel Air Base and Gilze-Rijen Air Base. As far as flight base De Peel is concerned, we think that with the F-35s we bought, the nine that come with it, we can go out with the sound room of Leeuwarden and Volkel. They look at De Peel because there can be arguments and add extra space. There's a sound room on De Peel. We'll see what the responsible possibilities are there. We will, of course, talk about this with the surrounding area. A process will also be followed to bring this to a conclusion. But we should not anticipate that now. We must go through the process set in motion to see what is possible in a responsible way and talk to the Chamber about it by the time we want to draw conclusions from it. She also talked about the problem of nitrogen around De Peel, which is also evidently present. There are too high emission and deposition values in that area. That is certainly a risk for the possible reactivation of De Peel Air Force Base. That is why we are working on an application under the Nature Protection Act to see what is or is not possible there. If nitrogen emissions are too high there, then there is a toolbox in the law to deal with them. This can be done by internal or external netting, but these are complex and also expensive processes. But let's see what's going on there and what solutions there are possible. Then I come to another subject that is of great interest to the Chamber: the radar stations."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-11-11-tweedekamer-26.u219", "speech text": "Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It was a disciplined debate, with military precision chaired by our President, but unfortunately the times are not coming. That's a bit of a setback for a defense debate. Yesterday I was a little admonishingly addressed by colleague Stoffer, who had his veteran pin on. I didn't, so I thought I'd make that up to you today. I thought we'd both be wearing it by now, but Mr. Stoffer forgot about it. That is, of course, inconceivable for a soldier. So I'm wearing it. For a veteran pin you don't have to be a veteran, I say for all the other people in the room. You can also sympathize with veterans. By the way, this pin belongs to my father. He's a veteran of New Guinea and the Congo. But Mr. Stoffer is getting up now."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-11-17-tweedekamer-3.u81", "speech text": "Let me cut this up. I hope the President will forgive me for talking a little longer, because this is not a question that lends itself to a 15-second one-liner, I think. Look, I've always argued that our presence in Afghanistan has been far too fragmented. We have hink-step-jumped through the country: from Baghlan to Uruzgan, from Uruzgan to Kunduz and from Kunduz to Mazar-i-Sharif. If you want to be somewhere significant and serious, you need to be in one place. Then you really have to choose. That's one of the things I've always argued. The second point is that you have to look very seriously at what neighbouring countries actually do for influence on Afghanistan. In this respect, I believe that we have ignored Pakistan's spoiler behaviour for a very long time, for example. We just thought: well, let's try to relate constructively to that. I cannot give an exhaustive answer, but one of the more painful lessons from the evacuation is that we as the Netherlands and also as the European Union were unable to launch an evacuation operation on our own. That raises the question of what that means, not only when it comes to how you deal with your security mechanisms in a European context, with your capacity, but also how this is done in a Dutch context. We have chosen to pool strategic air transport. The question on the table is: was that wise or not? I must honestly say that I will not answer that question for my colleague in the defense. Then there is Mr Van Dijk's question: did it result in what we had hoped for? I think the answer to that question is clearly 'no'. However, I would like to say one thing, also because I was allowed to work in Kabul for a year in 2011-2012. Apart from the horrible images that we always see on television, I always have a picture of the times when there were parliamentary elections. Then I saw kids playing there. They were standing in line for some kind of cottage. Then there came a child in front of the line, that stood there for a moment and that then ran away very happy laughing again with a painted thumb. And what were those kids playing? Those kids preferred to play. My great hope would be that, despite all the misery that is there today and despite all the setbacks that we have seen there, with the girls who have been educated there, with the children and young adults who have been able to see how democracy has been able to function there, we have planned a seed that has been so strong that it can also resist this repression of the Taliban. Whether it is and whether it will be, I dare not say. Anyway, at least I'll cherish that hope for myself."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-11-18-tweedekamer-4.u26", "speech text": "Who am I to deny that reflection is wise? I would not dare to do that, and I would be unfaithful to myself, but earlier reflections have led to the observation that, in the field of defence, we undoubtedly disagree with Mr Van Dijk, who has to do more himself than we have done in the past. The United States always insists on this. They're right about that, too. This president does so in constructive, mild terms. The previous one had a different vocabulary for that, but the trend is the same: you can't always knock on our door for your safety; you have to do something for that yourself. Defense is defense. Weapons can be used for an attack, aggression, wrong things, but weapons can also be used to protect yourself and your people. It is a fundamental duty of every government to ensure that one has the capacity to protect people. In that sense, I look a little differently at weapons than Mr Van Dijk. They shouldn't be here. Ideally, we should all decide to create a little more of a paradise on earth, but there isn't. Ever since Adam and Eve left paradise, we've been living in a transition period. That also means that you have uncertainties to deal with. These uncertainties simply mean that in case of emergency you must be able to defend yourself. That's part of the defense. It would be nice if everyone did it a little less, but unfortunately the world isn't that big of a deal."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-11-24-tweedekamer-10.u3", "speech text": "Thank you, Mr. Chairman. On behalf of the SGP, I want to take the lead. If I manage to curb my enthusiasm enough, I would like to pass on the stick to Mr Bishop for his contribution. Mr. Chairman. There is much wisdom in the Bible book Proverbs. One of these wise advices is: \"...to open the mouth to those who are not heard. For the trial of all those who are defenseless. To judge with justice and justice to the poor and needy.\" Those are wise words, which also touch the domain of Justice and Security when it comes to providing justice and justice. The SGP is grateful for recognising the need to invest structuralally in safety. We are not there yet, but it is important that these steps are also taken in the whole of the chain. There are also cases that can't be solved with a bag of money. Security in neighbourhoods and a robust criminal justice chain also stand or fall with sufficient human strength. Our call is also to continue to invest and invest more in training capacity, ICT support for police, judiciary and other partners in their important work. And also by keeping that work attractive in the safety chain, also by providing it with good equipment. When it comes to standing up for people in trouble, for vulnerable people, it is important that criminals know that crime does not pay and that victims of, for example, fraud and scams are actually reimbursed, so that they do not get into even bigger problems. I recently received a message and I understand that this is not on its own from someone who was \u20ac30,000 taken away by interns. The perpetrators circumvent the reimbursement, which they have been ordered to do in court, by serving replacement custody or staying under the radar. This man has no message about this; he has been working for ten years to repay the debt he has. My question is therefore: how can the Minister ensure that sanctions are fully, effectively and quickly implemented, especially in situations of this kind, where vulnerable people are at a disadvantage? Internet crime is much wider. This is also a threat that we must not look away from. We have already discussed cybercrime in various debates. Just now that we are talking about the rule of law, my question is how we can best protect the institutions of the rule of law, police, justice and the Public Prosecutor's Office, for example, against cybercrime. This vulnerability is also more widespread in society, we have seen in recent times. We would therefore like to draw particular attention to the protection of the institutions of the rule of law against cybercrime. Finally. There are also various websites hosted from the Netherlands on which sexual abuse of children is shared and where there is also a platform for illegal prostitution. We must also stand up for these victims and stand up for them. What more can be done to facilitate the removal of websites that share these images and services and to address distributors of those images? This too is a subject that we have been discussing for a very long time. We would like to see further progress in this area, in particular in the protection of vulnerable people."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-11-24-tweedekamer-10.u7", "speech text": "Thank you, Mr President. I would also like to congratulate Mrs Podt and Mr Valstar for their maiden speech. Mr. Chairman. The judge is in our society the last place you can go for an independent judgment. This is crucial and very relevant, especially in a society where an increasingly large group of people are struggling to respond to rapid developments. Because with about 20% of the Dutch population, something has to go wrong, such as job loss, divorce, debt or an unfair government, and they lose their grip on their lives. Those people deserve protection. This is a quote from a judge that was pronounced a few years ago, when the court looked into and identified the importance of justice. I liked sharing that. Mr. Chairman. If we look at access to justice, then we can't really ignore the surcharge scandal. Of course, we have seen tens of thousands of parents and their children make life impossible for the government. They lost everything, their income, their dignity and some also their children. Suicide attempts have been made and even the Dutch have fled. I wondered about the role played by justice in this. What about their access to justice? We saw in the report not for nothing unprecedented injustice; they have been wronged unprecedentedly. That report said that the Chamber was unable to carry out its controlling task properly because we were informed in an immemorial or even incorrect manner. It was also stated that the government attached more importance to the politically desirable outcome than to helping the parents. Of course, we have a Minister for Legal Affairs. I actually thought he'd find something about that at some point. Maybe I missed that deltaplan access to justice; I didn't really see it. I am glad, however, that there has been self-reflection from the Council of Justice. Last week we had a discussion with the President, Mr Naves, who said that there was no de facto rule of law for the victims of the surcharge affair. I really let that work on me. Families had to fight against a much more powerful government. An unfair battle, where justice did not always provide the protection that these parents deserved. He also apologized. Mr. Chairman. The core was the lack of legal aid. That led to bad litigation. One of the recommendations in the report was therefore to make the legal aid financed easily accessible and affordable at the time of the appeal and appeal in the case of premium cases and other issues relating to the security of existence. How does our Minister for Legal Protection view this? I insist: it is the Minister for Legal Affairs. I have been quite critical of this in the past, because I sometimes had the impression that he was undermining legal protection. I'd like to remind him of that once in a while. I am also considering a motion on this point, together with Mr Van Nispen. Mr. Chairman. In preparation for this debate, I looked again at what the Minister for Justice said about the surcharge scandal, but I saw that Mr Grapperhaus said something about it at a reading. He said: \"This rule of law has finally proven itself to be the rule of law because the failure has been pronounced and analyzed out loud, and there has been and is being taken action on it: from regulatory adjustment, improvement of implementation processes to, in particular, that satisfaction for the victims.\" This is really half true. I do not think there was a single victim in that room, because they would have contradicted this immediately. That satisfaction is really where it's really pinching right now. I think we will have another debate on this in a few weeks' time, but you cannot say that that satisfaction has been dealt with, that is simply not the case. One wonders how it is possible for the government to be organised in a democratic rule of law in such a way that, through discrimination on nationality and income, it has deprived the most vulnerable citizens of their rights and left them to their fate. What kind of rule of law is this, I ask the Minister for Legal Protection? Can the Minister reflect on this? Somewhere I was reminded of 2017, that interview with that VVD's Fred Teeven. You know him: today, driver, at Connexxion, I think, one day a week. He said in 2017: if you don't give a lawyer too much time to spend on a client, it won't be that much with that defense either. I thought, \"Would this be just policy?\" In particular, is it VVD policy to deliberately deny citizens access to justice? I have often been convinced in debates with this minister that he felt that people were looking for the judge too soon, that he felt that lawyers were too often directing legal proceedings. Like they can't make that trade-off. What I really do not agree with is that this minister will want to decide, through a committee, who will have access to the judge and who will not. Mr. Chairman. Then something about algorithms, because I really ask myself once in a while where it goes with our society. I get the strong impression that we are going to a kind of surveillance society, where mistrust and distinction are going to prevail. The Netherlands is world leader in this field. The group of DENK believes that the use of algorithms, risk classification models should be more transparent. That needs to be monitored more closely, and it really needs to be monitored. We are concerned about the impact that technological developments have. We see that algorithm research is often already loaded with prejudice. I would like to know from the Minister of Justice and Security how that is secured in the investigation and in security matters. Discrimination, sometimes unintentional, biases, but also unlawful action. Yesterday, we heard the Secretary of State responsible for the tax administration's implementation organisation say: we wanted to use another risk classification model, but we were told by an external agency that this could be unlawful and that that discrimination would help, so we didn't do it. I want to know what that's like with the BOLO. I also want to know how the review by an ethics committee is done, whether there is an algorithm register and how it is evaluated. Mr President, on the NCTV. A few weeks ago, we saw how a commercial company, NTA, committed unlawful infiltration investigations financed by NCTV in several municipalities. That distrust towards Muslims takes on bizarre and frightening forms and thus led to that large-scale infiltration of local religious communities. Why does the Minister not want to answer the questions that are being asked? Why won't he answer for it? I spoke to a delegation of about 180 mosque authorities a few weeks ago. They spoke with disbelief. All the good work they did, in the interests of the communities, of society, of the city in which they act, they joined the congregation; that trust is simply gone. One of those directors looked at me and said, \"It's just impossible for me that I get an offer from the municipality to think about security. That's someone I trust. And then they turn out to be hanging all kinds of cameras that they've been listening to people with. I find that really insufferable.\" Those 180 mosques have now lodged a formal complaint with the CTIVD. Some of those domes are also considering a corridor to the judge. Mr. Chairman. The mess at the NCTV goes on and on. We now see that of an Arnhem imam, who has been a victim for three years, it has finally been said that that file is being deleted. He doesn't see that, by the way. Subsequently, an agreement is concluded by the State and is appropriate. But we also see that a resident of Schiedam, whom I myself have spoken with, has happened exactly the same. For a year, he's had no idea what he's been accused of, no access to his file, and for the rest, he's just at home. Any more victims, I'll ask the Minister. What's going to happen to the unauthorized operation of the NCTV? Last summer, Mr Grapperhaus, the Minister, denied that NCTV is following people, but really, it is. They just do, and that information is shared. The NCTV should also be included in the CTIVD as soon as possible with regard to these activities. Mr President, something about whistleblowers. Sometimes we as a room through whistleblowers come to know something about wrongdoing and we always see the same reflex. Whether it's the Tax Office or the Justice and Security Department, the hunt for the whistleblower is being opened. I find that really insufferable. I would ask the Minister to put an end to this immediately. On that point, too, I am considering a motion. Mr President, something about the police. Let me join with colleagues, including Mr Kuzu, who expressed his horror at the riots in Rotterdam. I can't believe what happened there. Demonstrating is also a fundamental right for DENK, but you just stay away from agents and aid workers. Unacceptable behavior. The police are already incredibly busy and have to carry out more and more tasks. But that also increases the pressure on the police organisation. The quantity and quality of the corps are at risk. The police unions are now ringing the bell almost every week. The police are understaffed. We have also seen in the report that if we listen to the General Court, this Minister's plans do not add up to closing the gap. Something more really needs to be done there. We can see the problems with the outflow. In a few years' time, the corps will be threatened by this short-term training to a large extent by poorly trained, inexperienced agents. What's the Minister gonna do? Is he gonna answer to the police unions' burn notice? Finally, I am going to talk about asylum and migration. While we are debating here, we see a dirty political game at the Polish border, where refugees freeze to death and are driven away by force. It has become a situation in which refugees have become pawns of political leaders in a power game. We see violent pushbacks, pushing people back to the open sea on non-seaworthy rafts. I would like to call on the Secretary of State to appeal to his colleagues at European level and strongly condemn this behaviour. Is the Secretary of State prepared to do so here today in the House of Representatives? Thank you, Mr. Chairman."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-11-24-tweedekamer-5.u51", "speech text": "Yes, I acknowledge the fact that you are getting from the industry things that are used directly for the defence industry and that there is dual-use. I mean, I don't find all that complicated either. I think it's just crazy to say: yes, but because you can do good things with it, or things in agriculture or whatever, we shouldn't really let it fall under the heading of arms exports. That is why I put the question to Mr Klink. What are we doing here? Who's it uncomfortable for? I've been in touch with people who work in the defence industry. There is no one who stood at my desk crying and said: 'Salima, I think it is so terrible that I am covered by arms export policy; do something about it!' That's never happened before. Let alone ever seeing someone crying from the defense industry at my desk. So I don't recognize this. It always makes me a little alert. Then I think, someone changes a word because it's uncomfortable. No problem has been identified. It doesn't feel like it. No one's crying. And then we're gonna do something that I don't know the implications of. That's why I'm worried about that motion. Actually, I would prefer to go to the Minister's appreciation. If you don't know that yourself, you need to think carefully about whether you want to table that motion at all. The VVD doesn't strike me as a party that says: we don't care what comes under it and if bad things happen to it."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-12-01-tweedekamer-6.u3", "speech text": "Thank you, Mr President. I will speak today on behalf of the Animal Party on agriculture and on nature, and my colleague Mr Wassenberg will speak on fisheries and animals outside livestock farming. Mr. Chairman. The intensive livestock farming is a multi-headed monster. A pile of huge problems. Nowhere in the world are there as many animals kept on a rug as we allow in the Netherlands. For economic reasons, we abuse animals all their lives. In our slaughterhouses 1.7 million animals die every day and you wouldn't even wish for your worst enemy, let alone defenseless and innocent animals. Not only animals, but also the climate, nature, biodiversity and public health are sacrificed for the short-term interests of the agro-industry. The emissions of methane from the livestock industry contribute substantially to global warming, floods and rising sea levels. Fine dust from overcrowded stables, zoonoses, animal diseases such as Q fever and a bird flu that can jump from animal to human and antibiotic resistance threatens public health. The production of animal feed for the bio-industry causes the disappearance of tropical rainforests on the other side of the world. Dutch cows actually graze in the Brazilian rainforest, where they are hijacked to grow cattle feed. We are losing biodiversity, which is dangerously little left, and the huge amounts of ammonia from livestock farming are causing a nitrogen crisis, which shuts down the Dutch economy and housing, but is mainly a natural crisis. While the stables are increasingly filled with animals, it becomes quieter and quieter in nature. Nature is vital. The biodiversity crisis is the biggest threat to the survival of humans and animals on Earth. Ecosystems are on the verge of falling down, and anyone who thinks that we can proceed in the same way with the current livestock sector is playing a life-threatening game. We not only destroy the lives of animals, after a short and often miserable life, but we also risk the lives of future generations. Children who cannot help it that the government fails to protect their future, but who will soon have to bear the consequences of it. Mr. Chairman. That is a choice, but we can also choose differently, so that we can save the lives of animals and make our lives and our children's lives more pleasant. The Party for Animals has been making this choice for fifteen years in the House of Representatives, and the bio-industrie must be stopped. The outgoing minister didn't make this choice, even though she knows it's not okay. That it is not okay that newborn animals are taken away from their mothers, so that people can drink milk that was actually intended for calves. That it is not okay that we use more than half of the land in the Netherlands for livestock farming, while nature is in tribulation. That it is not okay that the cabinet farmers keep telling them that they can continue with business as usual, while this is a dead end. Mr. Chairman. This budget ensures that all the misery remains the same. This applies to animals, to people, and therefore to farmers, if the Minister is to blame. Mr. Chairman. It is our responsibility to stop bringing problems upon ourselves. Let us solve them with political courage, because a radical change is urgently needed. Mr. Chairman. Not everything can happen. Animal husbandry has long reached the limits of nature, the environment and the climate. In the case of nitrogen, we cross the boundaries of what our nature can carry for decades. For decades our farmers have been put under pressure. They had to take the initiative to make things more sustainable and more animal- and nature-friendly. Farmers were told for years that they could mainly continue to invest with all kinds of expensive environmental techniques, resulting in huge debts. Afterwards, they were told at the bank that more animals would have to be added, otherwise it wouldn't be profitable. What kind of government are you? And if you do not have the courage to set boundaries, and if you always focus on this self-regulation that you know is going to fail sadly, then it is not the farmers' fault, but the failing agricultural policy. The fact that the Netherlands is the most densely stocked country in the world and has the highest nitrogen emissions in Europe is a political choice. The agricultural policy, after cabinet, directs less farmers, not less animals. Only the big boys are left. Farmers are stuck in this system, just like the animals, which are stuffed in increasing numbers in the stables. In 20 years' time, half the family farms have been forced to stop. But the number of animals has not or hardly decreased. There are now just two to four times as many animals crammed together in each stall, often without even seeing the light of day. They are in pot-tight stalls, with expensive, fire-threatening, technical equipment to reduce the emission of harmful substances. This is a long time since it is known that the investments would never be enough to meet the goals we are now facing. The cabinet knew, but gave advice after advice. The first citizens' initiative of 2007 \"Stop wrong meat,\" proposing a 50% reduction in intensive livestock farming, was pushed aside. This while at the same time it was calculated by the Agriculture Economic Institute that intensive livestock farming should actually reduce by 70% in order to achieve environmental and nature objectives. But that report also ended up in the pile. Nothing was done with it. Eleven years later, the Environment and Infrastructure Council found that a shrinkage in livestock farming was inevitable, we want to meet the climate targets. They said, \"Just start with it, because the longer you wait, the more annoying it gets, not least for the farmers.\" This opinion was also quickly put into a drawer, not to mention an opinion requested by the cabinet itself. If you get so many urgent advices, you're gonna have to deal with that, right? Then the Minister can't look away from that, can he? I would like to know whether the Minister regrets that she has not done anything with these recommendations, but has, above all, postponed difficult decisions for herself. And now she's leaving it to a new cabinet. The same applies to nitrogen. Think of the PAS, the Programmatic Approach Nitrogen. It was not designed to protect nature, but to create space on paper for the economy. It is thanks to brave nature organisations who saw through this plan and went to court, that the cabinet plan to continue with nitrogen pollution, ended up in the trash can. The Netherlands was locked. We had to protect nature. And what did the Minister of Nature do? She went to Brussels. Not to protect nature, but to ask if maybe we could delete some protected natural areas. Bleker tried the same trick in 2011. So the minister could have known it wouldn't work that way. How serious does it then take its responsibility for the protection of nature? And now the cabinet doesn't know how quickly it can spend the nitrogen space gained by the voluntary buy-out of livestock farmers on new permits. This goes from the rain in the drip, because nature only recovers when that nitrogen tap is turned off and not immediately opened again. Permanent shrinkage in the number of animals in livestock farming is the only remedy that works. But no, the Minister came up with a nitrogen bill, which doesn't do what is necessary. The Minister of LNV himself acknowledges that. How can we be confident that a new cabinet with the same parties will come to an adequate solution if it does not first recognize the core of the problem? Recognize that livestock farming breeds and uses more animals than nature can tolerate. We can't be the milkman and the butcher of the world, and we shouldn't want to be."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-12-02-tweedekamer-10.u255", "speech text": "That's right. Yes, he did because he saw a very small bear tied to a tree, a child of a large bear. He wanted to shoot another bear and that was the offer; they had a little bear tied to a tree. He refused to shoot that defenseless animal because he thought an animal should be able to defend itself if you're going to hunt. He thought little animals shouldn't be hunted anyway. That's why they finally called the cuddle bear a teddy bear. But why this example, Mr President? Because the biggest threat in the sector and actually throughout politics at the moment is that we want to make everything simple and because making it simple often works very polarizing. I've shared quite innocently on Twitter over the past few weeks what I occasionally eat. That was a steak once and last week, on Friday morning at 8:00 a.m. a delicious Big Mac. I was then blamed for being an animal hater and for the meat lobby and so on, and so on, and for not caring about animal welfare. And that's just not true. To prove the contrary, I will be submitting two motions by the Animal Party today on animal welfare, because I am not the worst and I think animal welfare is very important. In fact, I think that if we don't push each other into boxes but work together more, we can bring the goals much closer. I must say quite frankly that I am far more optimistic than I was eight months ago, despite the fact that we have been waiting so long for the formation. I see a very nice cooperation between different parties here. I also see a lot of cooperation outside this Chamber, for example in the Seventh Action Programme, in which several parties in the sector have worked together and which the Ministry has also very well anticipated. I would like to make a few points of substance. First of all, thank you for the Minister's commitment on Limburg and thank you for the answer on the IBAs. I also have a question about agricycling. It is good that the Minister is working on several pilots and that she will return to this in spring 2022. I can see that the answers are very focused on composting waste. It must be about the much broader question of how it can be a earning model. In one of the pilots in Friesland that is the case. It would be very nice if we could take that with us and see how the farmer can play a role in the treatment of human waste as well. Thank you for the answers on company succession. We will put that motion to the vote, together with my colleague Grinwis. Finally, I have a final motion on the Seventh Action Programme. [[Motion]] [[The Chamber,]] [[heard the debate,]] [[Whereas the Sixth Programme of Action of the Nitrates Directive (6th APN) agreed to introduce a new combined phosphate indicator for the determination of the phosphate status of the soil;]] [[Whereas the 6th APN states that imports of the combined phosphate indicator should be neutral with regard to the use area for phosphate;]] [[noting that for clay-based arable land imports of the combined phosphate indicator on some arable farms lead to a 20% reduction in phosphate utilisation space;]] [[Whereas this reduces the supply potential for organically dusty products on arable farms;]] [[Whereas soil improvers are crucial for maintaining soil fertility, increasing water storage capacity, carbon sequestration and enhancing the resilience of soil and crop;]] [[Considering that the Minister of LNV has therefore adopted a transitional arrangement for the year 2021 which could also use the old phosphate indicator;]] [[noting that this arrangement was not extended in the Seventh Action Programme;]] [[calls on the Government to add to the Seventh Action Programme a 50% phosphate exemption for organic dusty products in order to compensate for the loss of phosphate utilisation space resulting from imports of the combined phosphate indicator,]] [[and goes to the order of the day.]] [[This motion was tabled by Mr Boswijk, Mr Grinwis and Mr Van der Plas.]] [[She's getting No. kst-35925-XIV-46]]"}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-12-02-tweedekamer-7.u194", "speech text": "After this PVV member has twice indicated his xenophobic remarks for the protection of all women, I cannot help saying that I kindly refuse that offer of protection of this gentleman but urgently. Within and outside the Chamber, I would like to ask this Member never to worry about me in this context. With this kind of patriarchal care, as a woman, you really don't need Muslims to feel unsafe. So thank you so much for the initiative. I do not want to go along with that in the frame that is put here by the PVV. Let me make no mistake about that. Let me be very clear about that. In any case, I cast this offer of defense far, far, far from me."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-12-09-tweedekamer-12.u177", "speech text": "This has been discussed before. We have also discussed this a number of times in the Foreign Affairs Council meeting. That's about four things. I have never heard any other sounds about that at a majority either. First of all, we note that both the United States and the European Union believe that the European Union should take action in several areas and not always lean on the United States. This means that the European Union will have to set up something in the area of defence capacity. We have said, this piece says, that this seems like a passable route: let's see why the battlegroups that existed have never become something and what we can do to make it work. That's one. The other is the whole chapter of resilience. That has nothing to do with defense as such, but with everything that has to do with the question of how to make us more resilient to the evil world, whether it's hacking, cyberattacks, hybrid warfare, own capacity for the production of chips, simply things that make you less blackmailable. It's also part of resistance. Furthermore, we have always said that it is important that we have decent partnerships in addition to economic security. The Netherlands and Germany have been very committed to this. By this we mean that we will continue to work step by step with NATO to ensure that we avoid duplication. There must be no duplication of effort and no conflict of competence. It must be what NATO and the United States say we should do it ourselves. What questions do we have? They're all over the property. In the technological part of resilience that is: how do you organize it with each other? What we also consider important is to define what these battlegroups can do: where can they go and where can they not go, what capacity do they have, what are they for? That's not clearly defined yet. For example, there are a number of questions that we consider important. To avoid a misunderstanding, we are not in favour of a European army. That's what was asked. But that's not the point in this piece either. There is no NATO army either. There are simply national armies that work together in a certain way. That's what's happening here. That is because each person is too small for himself to be able to mean anything to most of the problems in the world. So you have to work together. I think this is actually the most important thing at this stage, but it is not up to me to decide."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-12-13-eerstekamer-3.u18", "speech text": "Mr. Chairman. The Tax Plan 2022 is a Demissionary Tax Plan of a nine-month Demissionary Cabinet. But the House of Representatives is not outgoing and has done a lot of co-legislative work, not least by accepting the Hermans and others motion, with measures of 2 billion, with something for everyone. Fortunately, the cabinet was not left behind, with a package of 3.2 billion in support as relief for the gas price explosion. The tax plan before us is still extensive, with many proposals, which have little to do with the actual and pure tax legislation. This is a process which, unfortunately, cannot be reversed, whereby the Tax Administration is given the task of carrying out more and more side-effects and tasks. The Tax Administration is defenseless, because I do not know of a cabinet that protects the Tax Administration from ever more tasks, which are becoming less and less feasible, through the accumulation of new rules. The Tax Administration as head of Jut and State Secretary of Finance as a target; it is a great drama. My group has great respect for the two Secretary of State for Finance of D66 House, Van Huffelen and Vile Letter, who do not run away from fulfilling these dog jobs. Jobs which in many respects are heavier than those of many ministers or other State Secretarys. But for Secretary of State Vijlbrief there will be a \"function elsewhere,\" I ask. And is there going to be a separate Minister of Taxation, as my motion asks tomorrow, or is there going to be a Minister of Social Security Surcharges, so I suddenly suspect tonight? I would like, perhaps very modestly, a response from the rulers, particularly Secretary of State, Mr Vijlbrief. I come to purchasing power and income policy for pensioners. Tax policy and pension indexation rules have a major impact on the purchasing power of pensioners. These indexation rules have also resulted in no indexation of pensions since the negotiations on the pension agreement. And because the preparation of the draft Pension Bill for the future is called the \"Retirement Plan\" to wait for ever longer, 3 million pensioners, but also 7 million workers are waiting for a fair and decent increase in the pension and the increase in the build-up of employees. Introduction takes four years to be accepted, and in the meantime there is no provision for indexation in the transitional period. The promise of indexation in 2022 with retroactive effect as a result of the Van Dijk motion appears to be a pacifier: only one in ten pensioners gets a little indexation. After all, the requirement of 105% policy coverage is far too heavy, and moreover you have to place your own pension rights on the sacrificial block; expropriation by entry. The ABP, Care and Welfare and the two metal pension funds do not increase pensions in 2021 and 2022. No indexation is very severe in the low inflation rate of the last 14 years of 1.5% on average, but it is terrible, a terrible purchasing power blow, with 7% inflation, at least in this year and next year. 3 million pensioners will be in tortured uncertainty over the purchasing power of their pensions in the coming years, because any new Pension Act should be in the Official Journal before there is any clarity about indexation. After all, the transition ftk for the transitional period until 2027 is part of that law, as well as the announced general measure of governance, as implementation of the Van Dijk motion. I call that tying in optima forma. But I also think that the word \"blackmail\" is, unfortunately, not inappropriate in this case. Remember that many elderly people who haven't received an index for fifteen years I'm one; at the ABP I don't only have purchasing power anymore, for other reasons I do, but they don't have so many years left either. Mind you, not so many years left to live on. \"Let's not protest,\" I hear, \"it doesn't make any sense anymore, and 1% is better than 0%.\" This left-over reaction of many people, also in emails I get, makes me very sad, but unfortunately I hear it more and more often. Mr. Chairman. In each tax plan, income policy must play a prominent role, but all the more so because the purchasing power of pensioners with 7% inflation in these two years is hit hard. Pensioners feel that directly in their wallet, and that is why tax legislation is very important as a supplement. But because the cabinet is outgoing, no policy measures have been proposed, with the result that also AOW's will not receive any additional tax cuts. That's extra navrant when your pension's frozen, too. Inflation in 2021 is now estimated at an average of 2.7%, but is at a current level of 5.2%, and even 5.9% if we look at the European so-called HICP inflation index. That is much higher than the 1.9% estimated in the draft budget. The expected inflation rate of 3.5% in 2022 is already much higher than the estimated 1.8% in the draft budget. Everyone's purchasing power is falling, but pensioners are the hardest. The increase in gas prices affects older people more strongly, as shown by the letter from the State Secretary of EZK of 15 October: 2% for AOWs and 1.4% for non-AOWs. AOWers receive a compensation of 0.8%, resulting in an additional decrease in purchasing power of over 1%. The purchasing power for '21 was already 0% and, in total, over 1% in the min. But that is without the big inflation blow of the last four weeks, which will recover. Our estimate is that pensioners will fall by 2% to 3% in 2021. There is also a difference in purchasing power decline between AOW's and non-AOW's of almost 2%. Let me give you an example of someone with an income of \u20ac40,000, a bit of a fashion. You have an employee with a wage of \u20ac40,000 and you have an AOW'er with an AOW of \u20ac17,000 and therefore \u20ac23,000 pension. Fortunately, wages increase by 2.5% over that \u20ac40,000 on average. That's exactly $1,000. The AOW rises by 2% over \u20ac17,000. That's \u20ac340. The pension of \u20ac23,000 simply stands still and is frozen. The total increase for the retired is \u20ac340. Happily, it is \u20ac1,000 for workers. It is a difference of \u20ac660. We can take note of that. The employee also gets \u20ac57 more tax reduction than the AOW'er through the tax rebates: \u20ac104 compared to \u20ac48. Conclusion: a delayed increase in the AOW for flying inflation, no pension increase in '21 and '22 and a poor crumb in the Tax Plan. In the Tax Plan, two paragraphs are devoted to income policy in the explanatory memorandum. It's been different. For example, the general tax discount will be increased by \u20ac36. Later \u20ac14 was added, so it is now \u20ac50. AOWers, however, receive only half of these increases, i.e. \u20ac25 on an annual basis. That's exactly $2 a month, not even a cup of coffee. After all, fiscal discrimination must and must remain in place. Pensioners do not share in the growth of the economy of 3.5% in 2021 and 2022. Mr. Chairman. Then the AOW benefit itself. The AOW benefit will increase almost 2% in 2021, with \u20ac24 gross from \u20ac1.266 to \u20ac1.290 per month. On 1 July, at least for the time being, 1% will follow. That'll be $12. \u20ac36 in a year and a half. That is almost 3% increase in the AOW at a price increase of at least 7% in those two years. And because pensions will not be increased in 2022, my group is thinking of increasing the AOW benefit. I'll get back to you on that. In the written preparation we specifically pointed to the 350,000 AOWs without a pension or with a small pension up to \u20ac500 per month. We asked whether it would be possible to redeem the general tax rebate for this group. According to the ANBO, this would mean \u20ac736 less tax for those AOWs. In reply to our question, the Secretary of State understands this; he is nodding, but unfortunately I too do not have the opportunity to make this cash-flow possible in the current system. Omtzigt early last week in a motion in the Lower House for 4% additional increase in the minimum wage. In his motion there was nothing about the link to the AOW and the benefits, but fortunately he made that clear. Omtzigt also wants a linked increase in the minimum wage. I ask the Secretary of State if an unconnected increase in the minimum wage, as suggested by the CPB, is an option for this cabinet. It could do this in part: the minimum wage added 5% extra and the AOW only 2.5%, for example, half a link. But can you rule this out for my group? Because 50PLUS will fight for maintaining the linking of the full 100% of the AOW and the assistance to the minimum wage. We consider that to be a question of civilisation. Last week, following the debate in the Social Affairs budget on 10 December, Secretary of State Wiersma sent a letter to the House of Representatives in which he gave the lowest incomes an additional compensation of \u20ac200 for the increase in energy costs, especially the recent one. In the letter I read to my bewilderment another word I cannot agree that only AOW's are eligible without a pension and also only on request from the municipality. My question is: how big is this group of AOWs without a pension? If that were 150,000 people, I don't know, then this means that there is an estimated group of 200,000 AOWs with a small pension of up to \u20ac500 gross per month. This will mean that people with a pension of \u20ac50 or \u20ac100 per month will not get \u20ac200 at all. The AOW's without a pension must apply for this allowance of \u20ac200 from the municipality itself. I call that begging in the city. I call that a new form of poor care. That can't be true, can it? Our group asked about the possibilities to increase the AOW by 2% or to increase it separately by \u20ac300 extra on an annual basis. In the detailed and clear reply of the Secretary of State in the note following the final report, the Secretary of State refers to the AOW grant in relation to the \u20ac300. He says that this increase requires a legislative amendment lasting six months, which is retroactive, because it is a so-called \"favourable' measure. An increase of 2% in the AOW benefit itself requires a legislative amendment, but it takes 18 months. An execution test should also be made. What does the Secretary of State think against the background of his answer and our question of a one-off increase of \u20ac300 extra and of the suggested technique of compensation? This concession is called \"AOW purchasing power meeting\" and now amounts to \u20ac26 per month on top of the ordinary AOW benefit? Overall, this will be a one-off increase of 2% next year. My group is considering a second-term motion. We are of course extremely interested in the reaction of the Secretary of State. Mr. Chairman. Our written questions and my contribution to this debate show our great concern about the increasing decline in the purchasing power of the elderly, of 3 million AOWs. The 50PLUS Group must constantly raise the issue of tax age discrimination. This tax burden on the elderly is becoming increasingly oppressive. I therefore have to assess the tax proposals on this. Under the motto \"lower taxes on labour,\" the elderly are getting harder and harder, because taxation is a zero sumgame: what you give one, you take away from the other. I also hear and read rumours about the cabinet formation, namely that the tax on labour will have to be reduced further. Income and payroll taxes are levied on income from labour. That is according to the law: wages and deferred wages on former labour, so pension. According to the law, there is no tax on labour. However, the tax trick has been invented to turn labour costs into a tax subsidy for workers. This offers unprecedented ways of turning the purchasing power buttons and also using it as a superleveling tool through the additional instrument of income-dependent phasing-out."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2021-12-15-tweedekamer-5.u70", "speech text": "Thank you, Mr. Chairman. If you wait long enough, doubt, meet and muddy up, you'll come up with rude measures that come in very hard. All children, teachers and parents who have listened to the cabinet for weeks and heard that the schools had to stay open now come home from a very cold carnival. The school is closed, but you can go shopping with your kids. A business meeting with 20 adults can just go on, but twenty children in a class, that's not allowed anymore. Many people are frustrated by the way in which the cabinet tackles this crisis and by the laconical way in which measures are taken, such as Minister De Jonge, who says to Nieuwsuur that people simply shouldn't complain like this: \"They should have seen the schools close a long time ago.\" But the truth is, of course, that you could have seen this coming as long as you didn't listen too much to this cabinet, because that has been proclaiming the opposite for weeks. Now it comes as a robbery for schools, but also for parents, who of course also have to work and then look at grandpa and grandma to look after the grandchildren next week. That could have prevented the cabinet from doing so by clarifying much earlier what this Chamber has asked for several times. Mr. Chairman. We do not see any strategy or scenarios that this cabinet is tackling the crisis and we do not see what choices are being made. The population is not taken into account, not in the figures that make the measures necessary, not in the consideration of why you can shop but cannot go to school, nor in the long-term perspective. Because all people hear is that temporary measures are constantly being extended. We do not see a clear plan for education either. Ventilation hasn't improved everywhere and there are no CO-meters in every room. My question is: how complicated is it now to ensure that a CO meter is purchased and hung for each local area? Why isn't every school getting the promised self-tests? The Prime Minister could not at the press conference promise that the schools would open again in January. My question to the cabinet is why the cabinet is not clear about this. Why doesn't the Cabinet say that dense schools are not acceptable as long as adults, for example, can go to the McDonalds, the HEMA and the caf\u00e9? How do commercial interests still relate to the right to education? Mr. Chairman. The Omikron variant is coming up fast. Between the nose and the lips, Minister De Jonge spoke yesterday at the press conference on emergency scenarios that would be ready. My question to the Minister is exactly what he meant by that. What are these scenarios and what measures is the Cabinet considering? Mr. Chairman. The best defense against omikron is vaccination and booster shot. Throughout the Netherlands people are now wondering why a rich and well-organized country like the Netherlands can't manage to get a shot at every 50-player this year. I have just talked to Mr Paternotte about this: why not a walk-in location, large locations in every municipality, where you can just go for that shot? Why wouldn't I? Finally, Mr President. The pressure on care is still immense, in hospitals, but also in home care, in general practitioners and in nursing homes. Every day we hear that carers, including many hospitals, cannot make the agreements with health insurance companies on the financing of care for the coming year. We are very concerned about this, because this creates great uncertainty for patients. If you're sick, you can't be sure that in the hospital around the corner your treatment can just take place next year. We really think this should stop. It's bizarre that this cabinet is still keeping the hospitals on the line for next year. I would also like to ask the Minister whether he would like to put another line through this zero line in his absence. We cannot let it happen that the hospitals will soon be without a budget and without proper agreements on the financing of care, while they have a huge amount of work to do. As far as we are concerned, it is also a symbol of the state of our healthcare system that we need to discuss competitive insurers, market forces and not get the most necessary care properly funded. That's it, Mr. Chairman."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2022-01-18-eerstekamer-8.u41", "speech text": "Thank you, Mr President. On behalf of the VVD Group, too, warmly congratulate the Secretary of State on this beautiful position. We look forward to long-term cooperation. Mr. Chairman. Two preliminary remarks. I stand here as an alternate for Mrs De Bl\u00e9court. It could be connected to this file in a far derived form. For myself, I worked as a freelancer for the Rembrandt Association in a previous life, but that was 30 years ago. Mr. Chairman. It is now clear what this bill is about. You can see it along two lines. I'll call them short. For centuries, this important work was in private hands. It's been about that for a while. It was owned, among other things, by the King of England. Since 1844, I say in the direction of Mr Janssen, it was in the hands of the De Rothschild family. This purchase will bring this painting into the Dutch public domain and will be visible to everyone. According to specialists, the banner carrier is still in private possession of one of the last highlights. According to those specialists, such a painting does not come again soon. Moreover, it has a great national art history and historical importance. From an art-historical point of view, it marks the breakthrough of the young Rembrandt from Leiden to the already internationally famous Rembrandt from Amsterdam. Historically, the image illustrates the development of Dutch society, with self-conscious citizens, who would arrange their own defenses in Amsterdam, still in the middle of the Eighty Years' War, which would only end twelve years later. Private organisations, including the Rembrandt Association, made 25 million available, and from the National Museum Purchase Fund, which has an earmarked budget for art purchases like this, 19 million. A nice public-private partnership, which noted that the Association Rembrandt, which was founded at the end of the nineteenth century precisely to preserve important works of art for the Netherlands, has never made such a big contribution to this goal. Can the Secretary of State indicate how the government looks at the filling of, and spending of, the National Museum Purchase Fund in the future? In other words, drawing on the written answers, can it undertake to further inform the Court of Justice of this after a study report has been published in February? The second line is next. The amount actually requested in this proposal is 131 million. That makes it, still as part of that 150, an extremely high amount. However, according to connoisseurs, the asking price is a real amount and fits into the bizarrely high prices paid for top artworks of this category. The government is not an evaluator of art and culture. So we must also rely on these specialists in terms of pricing. The timing of the purchase is unfortunate, at a time when support packages for the cultural sector heavily affected by corona are needed. It has to be remembered that the French owner brought the work on the market and the Dutch State showed his interest in 2018 before the pandemic corona violence broke out. Mr. Chairman. We all recognize the dilemma between securing this important work of art from a historical and art-historical point of view on the one hand and the considerable sum of money and the unfortunate coronation with the corona measures on the other. However, these are parallel pathways for the members of the VVD Group. Admittedly, you can only spend your money once. We very much agree with Mr Frentrop's quote that public money is always scarce. But it is a one-off expenditure from the general budget and there will therefore be no less money available for the cultural sector. So the choice for the VVD fraction is not either or, but en-en. Fortunately, the cultural sector has already received additional support of 3.2 billion and 84.5 million in December last year. Both times were occasional, but in addition a structural additional contribution of 170 million per year was agreed in the coalition agreement. A debate on thezzp'ers in the arts and culture sector would be very good. That debate is probably necessary, but the VVD Group is not a sine qua non to decide on the proposal before us. Mr. Chairman. This purchase may generate additional economic benefits by many additional visitors. There is a chance that De Vaandelbearer will work as a magnet for Rembrandt's already very popular work, but this is not certain. The likely increase in value is not a significant factor in decision-making, because we are never going to sell this painting again. At least, that is a correct assumption, the members of my group ask the Secretary of State. The real question is whether we think a painting of this caliber belongs in the national treasury of the Netherlands. The VVD Group responds positively to this question. Mr President, I will conclude with two more questions to the government. The Vandelbearer is the last major key work of Rembrandt in private possession, unless the Rembrandt Research Project makes spectacular new discoveries. It is also a work of his hand that is a missing link in visualizing and clarifying the development of his artistry. At the same time, this work illustrates the development of Dutch civil society at the time of the Eighty Years' War. The government also endorses this historic value of De Vaandelblader, we ask the Secretary of State. Is it realistic to assume that, given the high international auction prices, this work could bring even more to an auction than the current asking price, we ask the government. We are, as always, waiting for the Secretary of State's reaction with great interest."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2022-01-18-tweedekamer-9.u322", "speech text": "Madam President. I just left something on the train. That could happen. There was someone who had found it and was kind enough to deliver it somewhere, but it came back to me via a huge detour. The nice thing in its aftermath was that church historian Paul of Spirit was kind enough to give me a statue of Saint Anthony. Mrs Ploumen comes from Noorbeek, deep in South Limburg, and knows who Sint-Antonious is there for. That's the saint you call upon when you're looking for lost objects. So I've got Saint Anthony on my desk now, and he's gonna guide me. I'm just too much Protestant to be absolutely sure that he's helping me with everything I'm losing, but maybe he can help us in the next period to remember. There are people we must not forget and there is a way of working that we must not forget. So let us hope for the help of Saint Anthony to continue to remember what it is about. It's about working together, working together. This country has grown in size because, despite very large, profound differences, political struggle and, indeed, Mrs Marijnissen! In the end, ideological clashes end up sitting around that table and saying, \"Oh, we have to get out of it; we still have to settle our differences.\" That is why we also have Article 23, for example, the freedom of education. That is not a toy of confessional parties and that is not the defense of schools that I happen to like very much, but a vision of society: that school is not from the government, but from the parents. Space for difference; for that our heart beats and for that you need cooperation. That's why we have a polder and that's why we're a coalition country. That is why, after months of political infertility and inability to work together, we, as the Christian Union, have said: it must not be up to us. That's why I'm here. But I'm not standing here as a member of the fan club of the cabinet that sits there. I stand here as one of the 150 members of this Chamber, who controls the government and is a co-legislator and has a responsibility there. That is why I hope that there will be a sharper distinction between the Chamber and the Cabinet and that there will be a less sharp distinction between coalition and opposition. We're gonna have to work together. That also requires something of our style, and that also requires something of openness. The coalition agreement also gives that openness, but we will have to seek that freedom of debate. My first question to the cabinet concerns the position of the Chamber in relation to the funds. There's a lot of billions in there. Questions have been asked about this too. The Court of Auditors also asks this question: how does that affect the Court's budget law? I would like the House to retain its position and that we can all continue to exercise full control over it. We shouldn't forget the people who dropped out. Sometimes I go too much with Mr Heerma and we read the same researches, namely the Atlas van Afhaakt Nederland, by Ren\u00e9 Cuperus and Josse de Voogd, which actually make very insightful about who it is. There are very specific places; the map is also really physically made. There you see dark places, often on the edges of our country, where people simply no longer believe that the government is there for them, no longer believe that you can trust each other and that we here in this country take care of each other and no longer believe that working together makes you stronger. They see that there are others who win and that it is they who lose. There are groups where basically everything comes together: low income, poverty, debt, poorer housing and worse health, those two have to do with each other at times, less security in the labour market and little hope. There's a middle class under pressure. These are families who can only make ends meet and who are now looking with fear and trembling at inflation and at the rising energy bill. We have seen the billing of the Nibud, with all the minions, which Mr Omtzigt so pictured here. They look at it with fear and tremble. We see older people, who are indeed declining in purchasing power. Madam President. The coalition agreement states that there must be a balanced purchasing power picture, which is good for everyone. That's a promise and an effort. My question is whether that is indeed the guiding principle and the anchor when the cabinet starts making choices about purchasing power and whether the Netherlands can count on us to do so. I'll keep thinking about these groups. I won't forget these groups. Maybe Saint Anthony will help me do that. That is why we have taken this step. We will assess government policy very specifically on the impact on these groups. That's why we're moving from a housing market to housing. Houses aren't profit factories, they're places to live, to start a family and to live. That is why we abolish the landlord's tax, so that homes, including rentals, remain affordable and available. I am very pleased with the ambitions in climate policy. This is a sign of good care for creation. But the urgent and necessary energy transition must take place in a social way. I spoke with Mr Marijnissen about the threat of energy poverty or, as she said, climate justice. The SP also warns against the threat of energy poverty. That is why this year there is a lot of money going to reduce the energy bill and we are really going to work on insulation. That's gotta get there where it's most needed. That is why we are also increasing the legal minimum wage and assistance. That is why we are abolishing the loan system and re-entering the basic grant, so that young people are not burdened with debt, but can go back to college with care and hope. That is why we are stepping up the fight against poverty and debt and, for example, abolishing the cost sharing standard, which does not keep people together, but drives them apart. That has to end. We need each other. We need to take care of each other. That's why we make the choices we make."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2022-01-18-tweedekamer-9.u350", "speech text": "Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First of all, congratulations to the new cabinet. I hope you can do your job in a very pleasant and safe way, with a clear look. At the same time, I am also concerned about the cabinet. I read the coalition agreement and I think there is something going on in terms of eye problems. The Prime Minister said it already in 2017: for vision you have to go to the ophthalmologist. But apparently he hasn't made that appointment yet, because the clear vision is missing. Clear vision of a future vision for the Netherlands. Clear insight into the integral link and social cohesion between policy areas. Clear understanding of demographic developments and their impact. It's not here. Unfortunately, this is not only significant for this cabinet, but for many Cabinets before that. That's why we're having a housing crisis. That is why we are breaking our heads about the affordability and accessibility of care, the sustainability of our pension system and the enormous problems surrounding the climate. Lack of clear vision breaks us up here. It should have all been dealt with sooner. But the worst part is that this cabinet has one big blind spot, namely for 7 million people aged 50 and over, of whom over 3 million are retired. In the entire coalition agreement, the word \"aging\" is only mentioned once. When it comes to workers, this cabinet also forgets the elderly. Many older people are no longer able to work because of age discrimination. An ombudsman is being set up for labour market discrimination, but it should not look at age discrimination. Why, I ask the Prime Minister. The cabinet is doing everything it can to give people who work a better income position, and that is fine. But if you stop working and retire, you'll be completely out of the sight of this cabinet. It's called tunnel vision, or maybe stare. It is blind staring at the production factor paid labour instead of on man. Moreover, I believe that I have already said to Mrs Hermans of the VVD today that people who no longer work paid are also of great social value to our society. They are also a factor of production. If that's how you want to talk about people. For example, think of our carers. More than 80% of carers, mainly elderly, are currently taking care on a scaled basis. These people are of great social value, economic but also social. But here too an integral vision is lacking. Will the cabinet be committed to a follow-up to the administrative agreement Together strong for care and, if so, how? Mr. Chairman. The most painful point in this coalition agreement is, in my view, the way in which older people are treated or not treated. The most striking and poignant example is that the government wants to decouple the AOW from the benefits. And even though that is occasional in order not to have to give the minimum wage increase to the AOWs, it is an acidic appeal for opposition parties and even for the senior party sections of the coalition parties a cold cut. Mr. Chairman. In 1947, Minister Drees introduced the Temporary Emergency Law on Old Age Services, followed by the AOW which was introduced ten years later by Minister Suurhoff. From that moment on, there were concerns about the sustainability of the AOW, because it was already clear that society would age. This is why the AOW Savings Fund was set up in 1997. That was a fund to cope with that peak in the ageing population that was already foreseen at that time around 2020. That fund should have been worth 135 billion by now. \"Had\" I say, because the Savings Fund AOW was dissolved in 2011. And why, the people who look at home will wonder. Because since the creation of the AOW Savings Fund in 1997, no cabinet has deposited money in that fund. And in 2011 it turned out to be an empty fund and it was therefore abolished. And now the cabinet plans to disconnect the AOW from the minimum wage and benefits. That way, a lot of money is taken away from pensioners. And yes, 700 million is coming back in the old-age discount, which does nothing for a large part of the AOW'ers. The people with only AOW or a small supplementary pension do nothing. I wish we had the savings fund by now. Mrs Hermans of the VVD pointed out that the purchasing power of pensioners should be taken into account, because the coalition seeks balanced purchasing power for all. And the group chairmen of D66, CDA and Christian Union also said that today. The decoupling of the AOW is therefore not necessary in my view. There are billions more going to, for example, Defence, Justice and Education, so much so that I read in the documents that some departments are not even getting this money for the coming cabinet period. Why not go to these departments a little less, so we can give our elders the respect they deserve? Anything is possible, but it's a matter of making choices, political choices. We don't want to leave the elders in the fucking corner again, do we? I'd like a reflection from the Prime Minister on this. In 1980, the link between the AOW and the benefits was a question of civilisation. The AOW cannot be decoupled from benefits after four decades and put pensioners back on purchasing power disadvantage. That's not civilized. I wonder why four parties pay so little attention to our elders. D66 is mainly aimed at young people, but it should also be remembered that they also grow old once. The VVD is for the workers, but pensioners have also worked and still make an important contribution to our society. The CDA and the Christian Union, always senior friendly parties, have really missed the right turn in this coalition agreement as far as I am concerned. I would like to hear from the Prime Minister what, if the starting point for this coalition agreement has been 'to look at each other', the considerations have been to give so little attention to our older people. Does this cabinet honestly and sincerely believe that you can treat 3.5 million citizens in this way? People with only AOW or a small pension are often already on or below the poverty line. In recent years, it has been found that the most louder person has been the one who gets the most done in this cabinet. But pensioners are often modest and cannot put down paid work to demonstrate. That is why I started a petition last Thursday, which has now been signed by over 50,000 people, and the counter is still running fast. Google \"AOW petition\" and you can see it for yourself. Pensioners have worked hard for years, and still play an important role in society. But they no longer have the opportunity to increase their income and are therefore defenseless in that sense. They have often also been affected by the \"knot\" or \"knot\" or \"knot\" or \"knot\" or \"knot\" or \"knot\" or \"knot\" or \"knot\" or \"knot\" or \"knot\" or \"knot\" or \"knot\" or \"knot\" or \"knot\" or \"knot\" or \"knot\" or \"knot\" or \"knot\" or \"knot\" or \"knot\" or \"knot\" or \"knot\" or \"knot\" or \"knot\" or \"knot\" or \"knot\" or \"knot\" or \"knot\" or \"knot\" or \"knot\" or \"knot\" or \"knot\" or \"knot\" or \"knot.\" Apparently, this cabinet has no idea what pensioners mean to our society. As the dome for pensioners said, all the older people should put down their voluntary service or care duties for a while. I think that's a good idea. We immediately see that without our elders we are nowhere at all. Mr. Chairman. You have heard me say it many times, but I say it again: our older people are the foundation of our society. If they stop their commitment to this society, we have big problems. Sports clubs are falling apart. Hospitals and elderly care organisations, which rely heavily on older volunteers, are no longer able to carry out essential tasks. Day-time spending for elderly people with dementia and hospitality is not getting their schedules around. And what would you think if all those carers gave it to you? The labour market in care is already acute. Then we've got a huge problem. Or older people who are careful so that their children, the production factors of this cabinet, can continue to do their job. If they lay down their duties, whole sectors will go down. Perhaps the cabinet could calculate what all these social tasks of capital represent. Then a substantial increase in income is justified. Mr. Chairman. The coalition agreement also speaks of a good and decent retirement for everyone. But can the Prime Minister explain to me what that is? Good and decent sounds nice, but talk doesn't fill holes. Let us be honest: every year pensioners are lagging behind financially, especially in comparison to the workers, who have improved about 20% in recent years. Non-working people are again and again in the minus. Retirement's rack's really been out a long time. Mr. Chairman. Unfortunately, I cannot catch the coalition agreement on any generational policy or a multi-annual vision of ageing. That's a really missed opportunity. As the Social Cultural Planning Bureau says in the reflection on the coalition agreement, broad prosperity is about quality, quality for citizens and quality for society, an inclusive society in which everyone matters and has equal opportunities, can and may do personal development and can and may participate fully. As far as I am concerned, an inclusive society includes workers and non-working people, the poor and the rich, sick and healthy, young people and yes, also the elderly. As far as I am concerned, the cabinet is right to plan that visit to the ophthalmologist and to ensure that it gets a clear view of all citizens in the Netherlands. Thank you."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2022-01-26-tweedekamer-6.u450", "speech text": "Do you want me to finish the first theme? We've already answered part of it. Let's get back to epidemiology. A question from Mrs Westerveld was: for control it is necessary to provide support; has RIVM also modelled later closure? Part of that has already been mentioned. No, that did not happen, other than 5:00 p.m., where it was said: under strict conditions it can be stretched until 8:00 p.m. The reason we have chosen for 10 p.m. has just been mentioned. Mr Jansen asked: how proportional are the measures? In addition, he makes the comparison with the flu. The obvious answer is: corona is far from comparable to the flu. Mr Van Dissel explained this in the technical briefing this morning. The disease burden of corona, even with existing measures, is much greater than the average disease burden of an annual flu wave, which we control with a vaccination campaign but without further measures. Then there is a question from Mrs Tielen about the WRR report and the endemic situation. That report describes a number of scenarios. Scenario 2 is based on what is then called a \"flu-pleasure,\" where covid is endemic with within certain limits, within bandwidths, persistently recurring likely seasonal recovery. That's kind of what it's all about. The WHO has just indicated that it is too early to really equate covid with influenza in this respect. RIVM did the same. It gives a slightly different picture of illness. If we're going to figure out where we're going with these five scenarios, we're going to have to line out scenario 1 of full dampening right now. It won't be. It may well be that we're about to come up with such an endemic scenario. Especially if we have variants that, such as now an omikron, protect vaccinations and boosters from which a previous infection also protects against and which are less sickening as a net result, then we can come to such an endemic situation. But it's still too early to tell if we're really coming to that. It may also be that at some point there is a new variant that spreads just as fast or faster than the omikron and yet is more sickening again. We just can't predict that right now. Occasionally there are signals of the potential emergence of such a virus. You know that's monitored all the time. That's what people turn up and look at right away. So far, the following variants remain small again, indicating less rapid spread than with omikron. In other words, we're looking at those scenarios. We're taking them too, but it's too soon to say: this will be it. We've been thinking for a long time: it's going to die out, especially with vaccination. Then we thought, \"It's gonna be a flu-plus.\" But it's really too early to really say that. Then there was a question from Mr Van der Staaij about immunity. He asked if it would give more room for young people. Immunity after an infection also works through in the final decrease in the number of infections. So this is also included in models. In the long term, extra space will indeed be created. In addition, an infection can also be used in a corona pass and you do not need to be quarantined after a recent infection. On the question, \"does that give you more room?\" So the answer is yes. Mrs. Tielen asked about the toolbox. She asked what the possible measures are and what it's proven to work. As you know, we have used many different measures over the last two years, with the aim, among other things, of reducing the number of infections, keeping sight and keeping care accessible. What works in an infectious disease is to reduce the number of contacts or to make those contacts as safe as possible. I always say: the chance of getting infected is the number of contacts times the chance of getting infected with a particular contact. That then depends on many factors, which are partly influenced by you. In the meantime, we have also learned a little bit about how people actually deal with measures and what their behavior is. We consider this behavioral component and the wide impact of the measures on social vitality and accessibility of care. We have already done that, but we have to do much more in the future, as has just been discussed. I will come back to that later on. Mrs Tielen also asked about the protocols, the field labs and the co-responsibility of sectors to open up. The results of these pilots, of those field labs, have largely become part of the current measures. Think of making a distinction between placed and unplaced, separating groups, deploying and validating the corona tickets and capacity restrictions. These have also been included in their discussions in the last week by colleagues, including those of EZK, SZW and legal matters. It is also included in various protocols and measures for a wide range of sectors. As the Prime Minister has already said, they have actually indicated: simply give us responsibility and let us help set things up in such a way that we can all open as safely as possible. The same applies to colleagues, but also to myself. I am really talking to a very broad group of sectors, in the form of a sounding board group, to see how we can move towards a good, effective and perhaps, hopefully, more predictable use of measures in the long term. Then Mr Van Haga asked how many infections are prevented by closing at 10 p.m. instead of midnight. It has also just been mentioned that the effect of an evening closure decreases as contacts go through later. Ultimately, it depends on the number of contacts and on the duration and intensity. With a later closure we also take a risk of an increase in the number of infections. I have just mentioned that the OMT and the RIVM were initially on the 5:00 hour line, with an exit to 8:00 p.m., subject to strict conditions. For reasons already mentioned, we finally decided to close at 10 p.m. That is a significant step forward. Then I come to a question from Mrs Tielen about scientific knowledge and models. Her question was whether these models are sufficiently explainable. This is an important point, which is very much addressed. That also affects the subject we have just discussed. We pay great attention to communicating as easily as possible on these topics, in communication about measures, about risks, about the impact and importance of vaccination, about quarantine, about tests and so on. There are also a lot of videos, visuals and hotplates used, along with Steffie modules. I've just had a moment to explain what Steffie modules are. You know it all, but I didn't know it. Many materials are also tested in advance through soundboard groups. So this is the explanation. You can't simplify the models on their own. Sometimes a model is the case: the more parameters you can put in it, the more fine tuned is the result that you will eventually get. But that is, of course, a moving insight based on a model. You have to put the new data in there over and over again, as I mentioned myself. But a lot of attention to that, because it's really important. There was another question from Mrs Tielen. It's also about communicating. Are the press conferences and the coronadashboard communicating enough? Can we think about smarter and effective communication? It happens. I will come back to the question of long-term policy. You have seen that, among other things, we have tried this at the press conference the last two times with a slightly different structure, using visuals, less text from our side and really focusing on as clear a language as possible. At the end of such a press conference, we will use a wide range of resources and media to explain everything once again and see what the response to it is. Mr Van Haga asked when COVID-19 would be removed from the A list. The answer is not yet. For the time being, international commitments are also being discussed. But, of course, we are all committed to keeping the measures as they need to be. That's what we're hoping for. The removal of an A list is something for the moment when it can actually be done. So much for my epidemiology questions. Then we'll get to the long term. Yesterday we mentioned it of course at the press conference and last time we did so: in the meantime we have two years of experience with this virus. As already mentioned, we now assume that it will not go away. We will also have to deal with this in the next longer period, in any setting: whether that is endemic or with short flares. We need to see that. Society has suffered a great deal of damage. In the beginning, the focus was, quite understandablely, really on care and access to care. But in the meantime we know what this does, for example with the mental health of young people, of people who have long been in uncertainty about their jobs and with people who have been working at home for a very long time. I myself, for example, have a great deal of admiration for teaching staff who had to teach online for very long periods of time. I don't know about you, but I already find two or three online meetings very difficult, let alone I can imagine how you do that as a teacher. So a lot of damage and a lot of impact. But there is an uncertain, precise future ahead. RIVM and WHO indicate that it is really too early to consider this something endemic or flu. Of course, we do have a number of handles. I have already mentioned the WRR report, with five scenarios for the possible further development. We are now dealing with a variant that is less sickening. I am very fond of it, and I did so consciously yesterday, first of all to highlight the importance of the immunity that has been built up, either because people have had an infection or because they have had vaccination. That has the greatest impact on making less sick and less infecting. Then comes the fact that this variant probably spreads faster, but in terms of illness it is slightly milder. We translate it very quickly to the opposite, but it starts with defenses and, of course, with measures. In those pathways, first towards the remaining part of this winter season, the winter season 21-22, then for the rest of the year and then, and finally for wider pandemic preparedness, we are working on the different steps. In the process we are now trying to achieve a more balanced decision-making process. That's work in progress. You must allow us to do this: that is work in progress. We have taken the first steps, such as sending an OMT advice earlier. You asked me about that last time. So we sent it as soon as it was final. Mind you, that's a different time than when news about it already appeared in the news. You are surprised, and we are doing the same. But we sent it as soon as it was final. Other steps are a slightly different way of communicating, I said that already already, and also explicitly, engage in conversation with a lot of sectors and target groups. Something has already been said about this. Then I will inform you as follows about this long-term approach. Next week, a letter will first come your way on the intended approach for the rest of this winter. Then, at the end of February, there will be a follow-up letter for the period thereafter, i.e. the somewhat longer term. For pandemic preparedness, that will be this spring. First of all, I just mention a few components which should be mentioned in a letter next week for the remaining winter. The following aspects must then be mentioned. I'll just start; it's in random order, but then I'll start as close as possible to the direct own portfolio. Then it's about care coordination, care capacity and care staff. Then it is also about the decision-making process and it should also be about steering indicators; a number of questions have been asked about this. And then it has to be about communication. These are a number of topics in the letter that you can expect from me next week about the approach for the rest of this winter. In doing so, I automatically answered one question from Mrs Tielen: when will that letter come? So that's next week. Then Mr Kuzu asked: are we going to continue with this long-term approach as we are doing now? Then the question focuses on vaccination and measures. You will understand that, of course, and we must involve development and epidemiology. If it was going to be an endemic situation, with the same long-term, milder variant, long-term immunity and maybe just an impact on people who are vulnerable, for example because they have an underlying disease, then you're taking a different approach. Then you'll take more of an approach like we've had in influenza for a long time. That is a different approach than the one you would choose if we had a new flare with something completely different and high numbers. We can't predict that, but we can take that into account in what the different options are. Then the vaccination and the testing and the measures. I fully share the comments you have made on proportionality. I really do share that. I also said at the beginning: I want to make it very clear that I was announced, at the very beginning, if the new Covid Minister is not the new Covid Minister. Let us hope that we will discuss a lot of other issues in healthcare in the coming years. I may hope so more than you, but I think we all hope so. So yes, the answer should be about proportionality, testing and vaccinating. We're going to have a separate discussion about tickets. Let us hope that the commitment to all these aspects is as low as possible, but we will have certain parameters for that."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2022-01-26-tweedekamer-6.u498", "speech text": "I don't know the article in question. I'd love to read it, but I can't do that right now. First of all, I would like to say that it is indeed a question of European harmonisation. The question is whether vaccination and infection should not be subject to the same deadline. What is going on through this and what was also the basis for the decision in Europe to maintain these two different deadlines is that an infection and the level of defense are highly dependent on the viral load that they have had. There are people with a very mild infection... we know the images of people who say, \"I'm tested positive, but I don't suffer from anything.\" There are also people who are experiencing a serious infection. Within these two categories there are people with a totally different degree of built-up defense. This touches a little on the discussion we had last time: can you use serology, the antibodies in the blood? On the basis of this discussion, Europe has chosen this shorter time, which is 180 days after an infection, as a safe margin. If the literature you refer to, which I will be happy to read, ultimately shows that there is no basis for keeping up with those two different deadlines, then we need to review it. But that must be a conversation within Europe."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2022-01-27-tweedekamer-9.u176", "speech text": "Thank you, Mr. Chairman. An abortion is a tragedy, an early and premature termination of a budding life. As far as FVD is concerned, abortion is therefore inhuman if there is no rape, incest, danger to the mother's life or serious deviation in the unborn child. Unborn life must be protected as much as possible, precisely because it is so incredibly vulnerable and cannot defend itself in any way; not only by parents but also by society. The tragedy of abortion must therefore be avoided and discouraged as far as possible from society as far as FVD is concerned. A legal period of reflection is a measure that aims precisely at this. However, with the present legislative proposal, the initiators aim to abolish the statutory period of five days for abortion. The explanatory memorandum refers first of all to the autonomy and right of self-determination of women. Autonomy and self-determination are also very important core values for FVD. But to what extent are they substantially under pressure because of this period of reflection of only five days? There are legally all kinds of time-limits. It has already been mentioned, among others, by Mrs Palland and Mr Stoffer. For example, the legal reflection period when buying houses is three days. Are buyers affected by this compulsory period of reflection in their autonomy and self-determination? Should this kind of reflection period not also be abolished, as far as the proposers are concerned, with a profession or individual autonomy and self-determination? And what do the proposers of the countless ways in which the State today tries to subtly adjust individual choice behavior to \"nudgen\" as it is now popularly called, for example, by obliging frightening pictures on packets of cigarettes, taxing sugar and alcohol, or by requiring workers to pay a pension? Quite specifically: why is D66 a five-day reflection period for an abortion paternalistic, but is it okay if the State assumes that every Dutchman has no objection to organ donation, unless otherwise indicated? In short, the reference to autonomy and self-determination in the explanatory memorandum to the legislative proposal is not very credible to us. In addition, the initiators argue that the period of reflection is considered uncomfortable by the parents. Understandable, but isn't this the right thing to do? It is literally a decision of life and death, which is incredibly far-reaching and irreversible. Such a decision should not be taken lightly. A legal period of reflection serves to ensure this. That it is annoying for the parents, that may be, but it is not only necessary, but even appropriate as far as we are concerned. Just as grief when a loved one dies is part of life as far as we are concerned, and is not something undesirable. How many parents regret their choice over time, perhaps because they remain unwanted childless at a later stage of their lives? Mrs. Van der Plas just said the same thing. Do the proposers have any idea? This feeling of guilt is, of course, not only a huge taboo, which will make it difficult to measure, but will keep up with them for the rest of their lives, rather than the five-day reflection period that this proposal is about. I would like to give four quotes from parents who have been remorseful of their decision. The first quote: \"I'm happy, really. But deep down, I haven't forgiven myself for my abortion. Afterwards, it turned out to be my only chance at a child. I've managed quite well to push that feeling into the background. But sometimes, when someone from my area is pregnant, or when I see my girlfriend's son, who is now as old as my son or daughter would have been, it hurts a lot.\" The second quote: \"It's now a year and a half later and there's not a moment when I don't think about the child that was never born.\" The third quote: \"After the surgery in the clinic, I was nauseous for a few days. Now I've been sick for eight years when I see an ad somewhere with a happy baby. Then my stomach turns around and I whisper in my mind an'sorry' to the baby that should never be born.\" The last quote: \"Every day I think about my baby. I'm so sorry. So terribly sorry. But I don't know if I'm sorry about the abortion itself or how it turned out. For me, this has really been done to me and I had no other choice at the time.\" Have the proposers realised that more than two thirds of abortion doctors, gynecologists, nurses, social workers and psychologists are largely positive about the period of reflection, because it prevents impulsive decisions? And do they know that a poll among 400 women with an abortion experience showed that 71% found the period of reflection useful? In addition, recent research by DirectResearch shows that a large majority of Dutch people support the mandatory period of reflection. Finally, Mr Stoffer also said: is not every life saved in this way sufficient reason for a five-day period of reflection? However, what we have noticed above all is that the most important consideration for us in the explanatory memorandum to the legislative proposal remains completely unnamed. That consideration is that an unborn life that has the potential to become a fully-fledged human being, just like all of us here in this Chamber, is killed prematurely and knowingly. It is a young, defenseless and early life, which moreover has no voice and cannot defend itself in any way. It is a life that deserves much more protection than a five-day period of reflection. It will be clear that FVD is very critical of abortion. Apart from the known exceptions, as far as we are concerned, abortion is, in principle, undesirable. I repeat the exceptions: abortion after rape or incest, death risk to the mother or serious birth defects in the child. As far as FVD is concerned, the period of reflection is therefore maintained. Except, again, abortion after rape or incest, danger of life to the mother or a serious birth defect of the child. In addition, as is customary in some states in the US, we consider it desirable to have a mandatory ultrasound in an abortion that is not covered by the aforementioned exceptions, starting from ten weeks. Finally. As far as we are concerned, the current 24-week abortion period is far too wide. An embryo can be viable outside the womb at the current state of the art from 19 weeks onwards. We will come up with an initiative proposal which will ensure by law that the maximum abortion period must always be shorter than the number of weeks from when a baby can be viable outside the womb. So that's not 24 weeks, it's 18 weeks. We have already reached out to the SGP on this issue and may hope to be able to send this proposal to the Chamber together with other parties in the near future. I'm closing up, Mr. Chairman. This is the last paragraph. In short, for FVD, any abortion is a tragedy. This is what we, as a society, should want to avoid, discourage and limit as much as possible. As far as we are concerned, the current legislation on abortion, which allows abortion for up to 24 weeks, is far too broad. This initiative proposal makes it a little easier to proceed to an abortion by abolishing the mandatory five-day period of reflection. So we will vote against this bill. Thank you, Mr. Chairman."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2022-02-03-tweedekamer-12.u237", "speech text": "I can try to serve it in all kinds of ways, but I really have to refer to my previous answer. I have a vague suspicion that we will come across this misunderstanding again in another debate. Mr. Chairman. Mrs Piri rightly pointed out the following. Arms supplies are always sensitive. We're willing to look into it. It's about defensive weapons. She said, \"How are we supposed to read that?\" I tried to indicate that in the letter. There too, I have simply wanted to be transparent. There are weapons that are clearly defensive. There are also weapons that are clearly offensive. But of course there are a lot of weapons that can be used for both purposes. So you can't always rule out the use of an offensive weapon that gives you primary defense. But let's be honest. Are we now concerned about a large-scale attack by Ukraine on Russia? I don't believe it. It is only about a country that is under great, great pressure, where more than 100,000 soldiers are on the border from a country that has a formidable military force. That country is asking the Netherlands and other countries: can you help us with the basic right to defend ourselves? That is the question before us. I really think that a decent and responsible cabinet, given the current context, has just to look at that. Again, that must be done with care. That should be in dialogue with the Chamber. I say that decisively, but certainly not in the direction of Mrs Piri."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2022-02-03-tweedekamer-12.u308", "speech text": "I understand the government is considering making ICT expertise for cyber defense available to Ukraine. Now I read on the NOS Teletext page a few days ago that the government would be willing to send ICT experts to Ukraine. I didn't read that in the words in your letter. So I want to know, first of all, is that right? And if that's true, where did those ICT experts come from? Is that Defense personnel, are they other government officials, or are you sending in civilian experts?"}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2022-02-03-tweedekamer-12.u316", "speech text": "Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you also to Members for their input and their questions. I want to structure my response along four lines. One. The security situation. Two. NATO. Three. The EU, where I also bring cyber. Four. The resilience of Ukraine and cooperation. Mr. Chairman. The security situation. It has been said many times today, but I would also like to underline it, because it is of course extremely worrying. It is high on our agenda and also high on the agenda of my colleagues in NATO and the EU, as well as in bilateral contacts. I would also like to emphasise that the most important weapon we have is our unity: the unity of allies, the unity of the EU. That is why this good cooperation and all the contacts we have over and over again are crucial. There's a lot of work going on right now. Since September last year, we have seen that unusual and very extensive troop-building in Ukraine. I say that explicitly: unusual. Mr. Brekelmans asked for that too. Based on these capabilities, a Russian military operation is possible. In fact, that could also happen with a really short response period. That is our assessment of the current situation. We must also remember that Russia also has a wide range of hybrid instruments. Those are instruments other than the structure we see. These are cyber, the means of influence and the economic resources they have. So it's even more than what we see in troop building. Unfortunately, the dialogue that has taken place so far has not yet led to a change in this attitude, which can only be described as aggressive. Now it is not the case that if the discussions do not produce results or come to an end, they automatically lead to military action. That's not law enforcement either. At the moment, our image - and that is also the international image - is that Russia has not yet taken a decision on it. So talking is incredibly important. That is the trail, as my colleague has just said, of diplomacy, of dialogue and of de-escalation. As I said, the defence ministers in the EU and in NATO have a lot of contact. We, too, are doing this with the aim of de-escalating. The Netherlands is committed to this and plays its part in it. I believe that we can play an important role in this. This is also reflected in the contacts I have had with all EU colleagues in the informal RBZ Council and in the bilateral contacts I already had with the German, French and British colleagues and with NATO's sg. Next week, I'm gonna keep doing that. I will continue to talk in Berlin with the German colleague and with NATO's sg in Brussels. The next week is the NATO ministerial meeting in Brussels. There will also be a debate in this Chamber next week. So there are many times when we can reflect on the latest developments. But the most important thing, of course, is that we all send the same message to Russia through that consultation. There is a possibility of de-escalating through consultation and dialogue. If that does not work and if Russia decides on an incursion from Ukraine, in any form whatsoever, Russia will pay the high price that has been mentioned here this afternoon and this evening, by Mrs Piri, Mr Dassen and many others. Then NATO. It is, of course, incredibly important to be prepared for scenarios in which these conversations yield nothing. It is for this reason that we have a two-track policy, namely dialogue and also deterrent and defence. NATO is primarily committed to this. NATO is prepared for all kinds of scenarios, where the alliance is also in favour of the alliance, but is now taking further steps, given the topicality, to see whether the security of the allies is sufficiently guaranteed. This means that NATO brings the existing, rapidly deployable reaction forces that we have to the full and that all all allies are asked to make available and fill the capabilities for the so-called Enhanced NATO Response Force. We are. That's what the Netherlands does. I have informed the Chamber of, for example, those two F-35 fighter planes that we are going to deploy, operational for the first time. I have informed the Chamber of the additional vessel deployed for the standing NATO fleet in northern Europe, the amphibious for transport. Would anyone then suggest... The debate this afternoon, of course, was about how that should be interpreted. Can you interpret that as an escalation? That is not, of course, the case. The defensive alliance that is NATO does its job, does its duty. So that is not something Russia has something to fear. However, it is a signal in times of rising tension that NATO looks, analyses and considers what is needed to protect the territory of NATO's fellow members. I think it is crucial that we, as NATO, make it clear that we are able to defend ourselves against aggressiveness and intimidation if they are directed against the alliance. So this is about deterrent and defense. This is, of course, also an explicit aim to ensure that Russia refrains from any form of aggression, including against Ukraine. In fact, this is precisely what Putin does not want, namely that NATO should strengthen itself. That's actually an undesirable effect, from Putin's perspective. This also helps these NATO actions as a form of deterrent against aggression against Ukraine. One was a number of specific questions about NATO, or related to NATO. Mr Ephraim of the Van Haga Group asked: could it be that Dutch soldiers are going to Ukraine? I would like to add a few words myself: whether or not it is in the NATO context. No Dutch soldiers are being deployed to defend Ukraine, because Ukraine is not a member of NATO. Article 5, the obligation to provide assistance, is therefore not triggered. Ukraine is a close partner of NATO. Our commitment is to assist Ukraine from NATO, from the EU, and also bilaterally, on which I will return shortly. Ukraine is a sovereign country and has the right to self-defense. I should like to come to the bilateral requests that lie before us, and to ask whether training aspects might be included. But it is not a matter of bringing Dutch units into Ukrainian territory under Article 5. Mr Brekelmans asked about specific options that NATO is looking at. I thought he mentioned Romania. Mr Sjoerdsma asked more generally what NATO is actually doing and what scenarios are being developed. Of course, different action options will be developed. It's not one option, but it's multiple options. I can't share with the Chamber exactly what they are right now. Perhaps it is a good thing to say, also because it has been emphasised by the sg of NATO, that NATO is preparing for the possibility that it is necessary to expand those ally units, should the situation so request. So at the moment we are still talking about filling up the capacities that were already foreseen, but of course we are also making scenarios where more is needed. If that is the case, the Netherlands will, of course, talk about it. We will therefore have to assess any requests. It is not yet that far, but it is important to know that NATO does. There was a specific question from Mrs Mulder on Baltic Air Police. This is indeed an existing link to which the Netherlands has also participated in the past with F-16's. I believe that was in 2017. It's just being filled on a rotational basis, I'll say. It's also being reinforced. At present it is foreseen that the United States and the Danes, among others, will contribute to this. The slots are filled. If there is still a need for this in the future, we will always consider it very seriously. At the moment, this is not the case with us as a specific request. That reinforcement is there, but it is currently being filled by other countries."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2022-02-03-tweedekamer-12.u334", "speech text": "No, I'm talking about \"a team\" because that's what it's called. It's called the Cyber Rapid Response Team. That's the team. This team consists of a number of countries, including the Netherlands and a number of other European countries. Especially in the cyber world, it is not necessarily necessary to be on the ground. I did not say that, but it is good that Mr De Roon is asking for it. Then I'll straighten that out. Mr. Chairman. Then there is the final issue: Ukraine's resilience and our cooperation with Ukraine. I think it is important to show solidarity to Ukraine, which I have also tasted today in a large part of the Chamber. The reason for the fellow Members' visit and the reason to speak about this is that we think it is important to assist Ukraine at a difficult time. Of course, Ukraine also has the right to self-defense, as I have just said. I have just outlined how we do this in the NATO context. Even within NATO, the sg has said: we need to see how we can support Ukraine. Ukraine is a partner of NATO. The fact that we say that to each other and actually do so, in my opinion, contributes to the effect that we want to achieve, namely deterrents. This will contribute to destabilization. And that is meant to prevent a military conflict and bloodshed in the end. I would like to repeat it to Mr Van der Staaij. In other words, we must support Ukraine where we can. The cabinet informed the Chamber in the committee debate, where Mr Hoekstra and I were both, that Ukraine had indeed made a request for military goods. We've taken that request into consideration. Of course, we do that very carefully. Mr Hoekstra has just said a few words about this. It must, of course, be part of the larger picture; that is important to emphasise here. It is not the case that Ukraine's request for military goods in itself is already making a huge contribution. What I think is important is that Ukraine has asked for this and that we are just looking very seriously and carefully at the possibilities. I cannot say much about this at the moment. It is also too early to draw conclusions. The process that needs to be completed is just, I think, well described. I should like to add just one thing to what Mr Hoekstra has just said. It also connects a little bit with what De Roon just said. A little depending on the type of material it might be that people should also know how to handle it. In other words, it also requires a form of training. But that too is a consideration that we will make and which we will, of course, share with the Chamber at the end of that process if it leads to a positive reaction. Finally, Mr President. No, sorry, it's not quite finished yet. I have a few more questions back there. We're doing everything we can with Ukraine. Military cooperation also comes in a context in which we have already given support in the past, for example for mine-mining, for safe ammunition storage. I also mention medical aid to injured military personnel and the important contribution we have made and continue to make. I mentioned education. There are also many forms of cooperation between institutions. The Military Rehabilitation Centre in Doorn, which is doing a very good job, may I mention it specifically. I should like to go into a few more details on the basis of a number of questions. What exactly can we do? Mrs Mulder, for example, asked. Others, too. I told you, it's a careful process. We need to test it. The question with us, with the Defense Department, is of course: what exactly is it, do we have it, could we deliver it? In other words: is it something we can miss for a while? 'Cause, yeah, you have to take that into account, too. Of course, the readiness, the employability, of the Dutch armed forces also plays a role in this. So yes, that's taken into account. And the inventory is running. Is there anything else we can do? That was, I believe, Mr Sjoerdsma's question. Mrs van der Plas mentioned a number of specific things. She was talking about training missions and armament and she was also talking about frigates: could we do that? I would like to say this: let us not all look through the straw of that request at the conflict that may arise between Ukraine and Russia. It's a lot more than that. Everything I have just said, for example, about how we act in NATO, and everything we can show as Europe by radiating unity: that is really what this is really about. Once again, out of solidarity, because we are really very worried and because we think that a country simply has the right to defend itself, we are going to look at this very seriously. But in the context of expectations management I thought: let me give this profit warning. Mr. Chairman. I'd really like to finish with this."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2022-02-03-tweedekamer-12.u360", "speech text": "Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you also to both ministers for the answers and for the openness they have given as much as possible. What gave me concern was the answers to the sanction package. It seems to be a long time before the European sanction package arrives. I would urge the Minister to emphasise the urgency of this in the European Union. The same applies to the supply of weapons. There was talk in a few weeks. It is precisely if we want a deterrent effect, both in terms of sanctions and in terms of the supply of defensive weapons, that it is important that we proceed with urgency. I welcomed the Minister's commitment to continue his efforts to inform the Dutch in Ukraine as much as possible. I would like to ask him to send a brief letter for the next RBZ on how far that has worked and how far he has managed to reach more Dutch people. I was also pleased with the Minister's undertaking that the Netherlands will continue to make an independent assessment of our non-essential embassy staff and the family members. I have heard clearly what the Minister said about the supply of weapons. I do not want there to be any ambiguity about the political support that exists in this Chamber. I want it to be clear that there is support for this. That's why I'm filing this motion. That's why I'm filing this motion. [[Motion]] [[The Chamber,]] [[heard the debate,]] [[whereas Ukraine is facing a major Russian military threat;]] [[Whereas various NATO alliance members support Ukraine with weapons for deterring aggression and possible self-defense;]] [[noting that Ukraine has also made a request to the Netherlands to supply arms and other equipment in order to defend itself;]] [[considers that Ukrainian military personnel should be able to serve the weapons to be delivered themselves, with the exception of training;]] [[calls on the Government to treat this request favourably, provided that the Netherlands has sufficient stock of the arms and other equipment requested, taking into account the necessary employability of the Dutch armed forces,]] [[and goes to the order of the day.]] [[This motion was tabled by Mr Brekelmans and Mr Agnes Mulder.]] [[She's getting No. kst-35925-V-72]]"}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2022-02-03-tweedekamer-12.u415", "speech text": "The Spartans were also very good at collective self-defense. In this respect, I hope that the Minister will take the lessons of that. No, I just wanted to say a few words about the Ephraim motion in part No. 67, because he listens very closely. It is about sending Dutch soldiers and I would ask both Mr Ephraim and the Minister to come forward quickly with an amended motion and appreciation so that we can both discuss it in good time in the group. Because here the phrase really listens very closely."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2022-02-08-eerstekamer-11.u7", "speech text": "I am extremely pleased with this action-oriented attitude, but I would like to ask two questions. Why should this discussion be conducted in defence with Russia and not just in this house? The CDA has been part of the government for decades and also has the opportunity to have that discussion here. Why would we have to put that in the defense somewhere else? We can just feed it in our own house."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2022-02-08-eerstekamer-11.u9", "speech text": "I understand you very well. Only, I call on you to conduct the discussion here and not in the defense against another country. For we can also judge our own rule of law and its shortcomings according to our own values. Otherwise we are going to have a debate. I was just talking to Mrs Faber about saying that I am not allowed to say anything to another country, because I myself have flaws. No, you can. But there are different levels of flaws. I'm fine with a call to work on it. Then we'll find each other there."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2022-02-08-eerstekamer-3.u153", "speech text": "Good. I was at the second dimension. The EU itself often remains out of the loop in the discussions. I have already mentioned the characteristic of a democratic rule of law. It is based as much as possible on citizens' own responsibilities to organise their own lives. I ask the Minister: how does this self-reliance relate to the growing flow of EU proposals? Does he take the principle of subsidiarity seriously when assessing Commission proposals? The third aspect is that state power is limited by safeguards against abuse of power. The government bases all of its actions on powers conferred upon it by the law. What does the Minister think in this light that the EU often seeks, extends or even exceeds the limits of its powers? Does he agree with the ruling of former Professor of State Law Teunissen that the Court of Justice, by not always preventing the EU from exceeding its powers, is actually acting as a co-legislator? In other words, does the EU itself not place great pressure on fundamental constitutional aspects? I would like to conclude with a specific issue, which I believe we have also discussed by means of interruptions. This is the recognition of abortion as a human right as a follow-up to the Mati\u0107 report, which was adopted by the European Parliament last year. Can I trust this minister not to cooperate in this? Does the Minister agree with me that if something is a human right that should also be defended in and through the EU, it is the right to life and certainly not the right to kill human life? How deep can we sink? A community, whether at European, national or other level, which deliberately and deliberately anchors the killing of defenseless, innocent lives as a fundamental right, has no future. For God's sake, let us remain a human Europe. Thank you."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2022-02-15-eerstekamer-7.u480", "speech text": "Mr. Chairman. I would like to make very brief use of my second term, also because I feel that 80% of the time we used in this debate was about things that were discussed in the House of Representatives in about the same way. I think that's a lot. There have also been a series of issues which had nothing to do with the declaration of government. But, Mr President, we are going to talk about our own role in the near future. I'm sure it'll come back on the table. Just a few comments. The VVD Group is very pleased that there is growth in spending on Defense. In this sense, I also support the view expressed by Mr Schalk on this matter. I hope, by the way, that we will never reach 2%. That is a strange statement, but I hope that the economy will always grow more than we spend. The problem is, of course, that if the economy continues to grow, we will fall a little behind 2% each time. The country where the 2% was reached very quickly was Greece. When they were deep in the crisis, they spent more than 2% on defense. The moment the growth strikes again, it passes. This does not mean that we should not carry out our tasks properly in NATO. That's what we're gonna do, of course."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2022-02-15-tweedekamer-21.u180", "speech text": "Yes, Mr President, I kind of miss the old walkways in this building, because there you could really enjoy a kind of four-day walk. You're limited here, aren't you? All right, we're gonna do something about that. I've got 26 minutes. I'm just the warm-up act for Mrs. Arib, you know. She asked if someone wanted to warm up the room, and I took it on myself. My conclusion is immediately in the first sentence: our democracy is not working. We live in a dictatorship for highly educated people. Those highly educated are as left-handed as hell. There's empirical research. Politicologists looked at almost 300 policy changes, so plans, things to do, and came to the following conclusion. Who always get what they want in the Netherlands? Those are the highly educated. Sometimes that includes the low-educated, but only if they agree with those highly educated. This has enormous consequences for the Netherlands. I quote. \"This conclusion has major consequences. If training groups were represented equally, the Netherlands would look very different: social services would be expanded, the differences between rich and poor would be smaller, immigration would be more limited, crime would be punished more severely and European integration would be reduced.\" The explanation for this is quite simple: the institutions of the Netherlands are in the hands of the left. By institutions, I mean the media, the universities, the justice system, the high civil service, but also the museums, the art world, the trade unions, the churches, etc. Climate-socialism, Europhilia, the craving for mass immigration and a disgust of the underclass that they ultimately despise deeply. Mr. Chairman. The idea of critically looking at party funding stems from the idea that political struggle must be fair. Of course, I totally agree with that. But politics is not just what parties do. Let us therefore immediately stop all the flows of subsidies towards all those left-wing institutions. So stop the money to Milieudefensie, an organization that gets 60% of its revenue from the State. Environmental defense is therefore a semi-public body. It's at the table at the climate table, but the government's just talking to itself. 98% of COC's revenue is subsidy. It has hardly any members. The club does its best to deny as much as possible how much immigrants, immigrants, are overrepresented in the violence against gays. Stop funding NPO66. Stop financing the art world. Take museums if they're trying to make fun of our national heroes. Hands off Michiel de Ruyter and Willem van Oranje. And forbid education, for example, teaches the critical race theory. That's how we get to a truly honest society. Mr. Chairman. The construction of the members' party plays a small but not insignificant role in our crippled democracy. How did it happen? And above all: should this experiment be continued? Once, we MPs represented a district. We were the honourable Members of Almere at the time, but not Almere at the time. That was a bad example. I should have prepared this, Drachten or Maastricht. Later, these people gathered here in The Hague. They were going to form a electoral association and those electoral associations became parties. Then something really crazy happened. Because you could also join those parties. Then you gave them money and then you got on the membership list. That point is important, because we had parliamentary democracy first and then the Members' Party. Members' parties are ultimately at odds with the Constitution, namely the article that states that we Members of Parliament should function without burden. Back in the day there was also a backspoke voice.I actually liked this Dutch version but that unfortunately went out. It is sometimes downright embarrassing what I see here in the plenary. For example, if you ask a spokesperson just before the elections \"what is your position?', Sometimes it happens that he says: I do not know, because the election programme is not yet ready. That MP's waiting at the door. The PTT is reporting for duty. The electoral programme is coming in and so the Member of Parliament's opinion arrives. And that opinion is thus determined by party bobos from outside the Lower House. Both trouble and backspoke! Or MPs who have to express a position that they openly disagree with. There has then been some party committee that has decided something. I remember the debate on abolishing the referendum. Both Mr Gijs van Dijk of the PvdA and Mrs \u00d6z\u00fctok of GroenLinks, two former colleagues whom I all miss, advocated the abolition of the referendum in that debate. At the same time, they admitted that they did not want to abolish the referendum at all. But their party had decided so. They openly admitted it, of course with the sneer \"yes, that's party democracy; you don't have that at the PVV, huh, hahaha.\" An insider of D66 told me that the turn of D66 to be suddenly against the referendum was the result of some party committee which had adopted this new position by a narrow margin. So that had to be defended in the Lower House. And we now see in the bloody G\u00fcndo\u011fan affair how the influence of the members' party has gotten completely out of hand. Sunday evening a press release from the Volt party suddenly appeared, mind the party and not the group. \"The party has decided,\" we read. And the party has decided to suspend a member of parliament. A madman... oh, sorry, chairman, I didn't mean it personally, ahum. Let's cut that out! You think Vera's watching? Let me say: a bizarre development. A club of members of Volt is in practice the stone-rich Dreesmann family, known from Vroom & Dreesmann, and the also wealthy banking family Van Lanschot decided to suspend a member of parliament. This is contrary to the most fundamental principles of state law. No one, but no one, can suspend a MP, let alone a party. But the LPF soap at Volt goes much further. The party even imposed a general ban on this Member of Parliament. Mrs G\u00fcndo\u011fan should refrain from debates and public performances. She must not be in contact with employees within the party and representatives of the media. Mr. Chairman. Have we ever experienced such an impairment of the dignity of the House of Representatives? Volt violates all the rules of parliamentary democracy and wipes off her fat Soros buttocks with the Constitution. Mind you, this is the party of the elite of good taste. Moral, superior Netherlands! The people who know it all so well, who at the memorial of the February strike with the raised finger push my party into the corner of the Nazis. I mean Geert Mak, but also Arend Jan Boekenestijn, Arjen Lubach et cetera. At the same time, it is scandalous and logical. Of course, because those crazy members' parties have been sitting on the seat of representative democracy ever since 1880. This is the closing apotheosis: the batch bumps a MP and sticks her a Band-Aid to the mouth. My group hopes to see Mrs G\u00fcnto\u011fan again. We love being called by her for scum, racist, gross racist, fascist or populist and we miss her sweet-vouched voice. Mr. Chairman. Democracy is meant to make the voice of the people heard. That's the theory. The practice is different. A predecessor of this minister, Dr. Ronald Plasterk, writes nice columns in De Telegraaf. I'm sure the left-wing colleagues will eat them all up too. Mr Plasterk, who is therefore a member of the PvdA, wants to have a kind of Danish PvdA, which is much more right-wing; actually a kind of half PVV in the area of immigration, nitrogen, nuclear energy, woke et cetera. Plasterk writes that this will not work, because the party frameworks are rusted. They're on the old left line and there's no movement in it. A similar observation is made in the autobiography of Onno Ruding, former Minister of Finance; we all know him. He wants a much right-wing CDA. He doesn't, he writes in his autobiography, because of those fixed frames. So the structure of the party prevents the voice of the people from ringing in."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2022-02-16-tweedekamer-3.u292", "speech text": "No, I can do that now. It's a crucial question. An infection is annoying for everyone. People of all ages can become seriously ill, only the older you are, the greater the chance. We know from previous situations with different variants that the level of defense and protection against serious diseases unfortunately decreases in time after an infection or after vaccination. We know this from experiences abroad, for example in Israel. If we look at the pace and timing in which the elderly, the over 60s, had a boost vaccination, that was in the second half of November, the first half of December. It's been a while now. In the past period it went well, despite the very high number of infections, but now we see it getting worse in the elderly group. It is crucial to continue monitoring this, because it is a question of whether the protective effect is decreasing in the meantime. I specifically asked the RIVM and the Health Council: monitor and advise whether at any time and, if so, at what point a renewed boost may be needed for a specific group."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2022-02-21-eerstekamer-6.u3", "speech text": "Thank you, Mr President. It is with great pleasure and thanks for the reception and for the debate just now. When I was appointed Minister, I was already called the new Corona Minister. My direct reply was that I hoped that we would talk a lot about other matters in the coming period. As you know, the challenges in health care are enormous. They are about training, about digitisation, about prevention, about capacity, about coordination and so on. I hope I get to be in your Chamber more often to defend laws. I hope it will be more often about other matters than about corona. But today we're discussing corona. That is quite understandable in itself. This brings me first of all to a brief introduction. We're actually at a special moment in time. In the meantime, we've been working for two years, 24 months. I sometimes say: this is actually the third winter. It looks like we're at a kind of tilting point, a tilting point with most Dutch people of all ages who have built up a form of defense, either by vaccination, with or without a boost, or by having experienced the infection at least once, or by the combination. There's a lot of people who've been through the infection before. In the past period 13% of the people documented as infected had previously documented the infection, and some of them more frequently. So that's another situation. We are now also dealing with a variant that, on the one hand, protects the built-up immune status from. If I'm talking about vaccination status alone, being vaccinated plus a boost reduces the risk of serious illness and hospitalization more than 30 times. That's significant. In addition, the variant in itself, even in people who have no immune status at all, seems less sickening, but that effect is smaller than with vaccination or the previously experienced infection and thus the immune status. That's a good thing. At the same time, we are dealing with very high contagion numbers, which fortunately now go down. That's why there's a lot of people falling out everywhere. You have seen the images: failure and modified timetables of the NS, a modified timetable of the KLM, hospitals and healthcare partners who have problems with it. And we have a situation where the WHO continues to say by the RIVM, by the Scientific Council for Government Policy, by the Academy: beware, we are still not in a stable situation. You have just used the term \"endemic\" and \"endemic\" a number of times in the debate. If we accept and define endemicly as a stable situation where you may or may not have a constant pattern of contamination with a certain compliance, then we are not there. It may be that we haven't been there for a while. If you look at the different scenarios of the WRR, for example, a palette is sketched. The first scenario was: completely extinct and disappearance of the pandemic. In the meantime, we have to note that the chances of getting there soon are not great, not even after vaccination. We're not getting there. Another variant, completely on the other side of the spectrum, is: continuous wave on wave of a seriously sickening new variant, where a previous infection and vaccination does not protect against. That is still not excluded, but we do not seem to be getting anywhere with that either at the moment. And variants in between are more or less sickening new variants, each time with a revival and hopefully in a setting where it eventually becomes a fairly normal flu or cold virus. We must realise that, even in the case of flu, large numbers of people become ill every year. Especially among the vulnerable in society, there are large numbers of deaths every year. We have incorporated that as completely normal and adapted our capacity and behaviour to it. The longer the omikron situation lasts, the more likely you will end up in such a setting, but that is absolutely not given at this stage after two years. There may be another variant tomorrow or next month. You know that in the meantime we also have a subomicron, which is still called omikron, but is again different. If new variants are emerging that are spreading faster, then we know that this can happen extremely quickly, really in terms of weeks. The spread and increase in the number of infections can then go by tens of percent per week. We have seen an increase of more than 50% and more than 70% at certain times in the last period. The situation we are now in is therefore relatively stable, also with the desire and the ability to speed up the easing. In this respect, I was very much in favour of speeding up the process of easing the situation. The cabinet has also chosen to do so and to align objectives, not just care and care capacity, but also social and economic objectives. In a press conference, for example, I mentioned a number of times the enormous impact the measures have had on young people, in terms of health, education and so on. So that's the situation now. We really want to hold on to that. However, it is completely unclear at this stage whether you can always stay away from measures other than just advice on washing hands and wearing a mask. If this phase would last a long time and continue in another winter, then at some point you will come with more and more certainty, like: here we are and this will remain it. But it is completely unclear at the moment. With that introduction and against that background, we are talking here about an extension of a temporary law. I'll start with the approach and what we're doing. The first letter I sent was regarding the approach of covid for the rest of this winter. I deliberately said: let us not send a long-term letter. In March, we will come up with the effective long-term approach. We're working hard on that right now. Without going very deeply into the depths, there this is not the setting for.... I will name a few components. In terms of prevention, of course, it is about trying to create a clear programme for possible re-vaccination and boost. This depends, of course, on the emergence of a variant, of the season, of any target groups etc. First of all, the Health Council should advise on this question. It also depends on a kind of second safety net of a medication plan: what means, in what volume, for which specific target group, if any, in which setting? This is all for protection against too serious disease. It depends on the best possible modelling and monitoring. We've learned a lot. The RIVM has a lot, the GGD has a lot and international there is a lot, but can we tighten that up even further? It also depends on cooperation with many parties. In this respect, we have consciously, earlier this week and also together with colleagues, had repeated discussions with many different sectors, such as: what would you do at a certain stage of a pandemic with certain levels of infection and people who fail to make sure that the increase in infections is reduced as much as possible, while at the same time making maximum efforts to keep our society open? For example, just think about ventilation in schools. That way you can actually walk past everything. Finally, of course, it is about care and care capacity. We are also working very hard on this, on the one hand, to optimise the direction of each region and, on the other hand, to ensure that capacity is increased where possible by region. Various aspects of a long-term plan are therefore being addressed. Mr President, excuse the somewhat longer introduction, but it is the whole background setting in which we are now discussing this extension of a temporary law. Nevertheless, we all want to get rid of the Temporary Law and measures. That's also the commitment the cabinet has chosen: is it possible to relax, with a lot of contact with abroad, while you can't really say just on the basis of the Dutch data how sickening that omikron variant is in the Dutch setting? We have chosen, however, I have called it a calculated risk for relaxation, and also in a fairly short cycle. So we want to get rid of it, we want to get rid of it. As you know, as from next Friday, we will only have two measures: the use of masks in public transport and at the airport and the use of tests for access at locations where more than 500 people meet, but where they are not replaced, no need to keep a distance of 1.5 metres and no need to wear masks. Those are the only two measures we have left at the moment. However, as outlined above, I cannot guarantee that there will be no need for further consideration over the next three months or at any time. So, yeah, I get it, but I don't know if just keeping a mask and distance will be enough. I hope so very much with you, but I really have to take it very seriously that there is a chance that it is not, not even in the spring and not even when we do not have any other omikron variant yet. In addition, the motion also puts me in a time problem. As you know, this extension decision ran until 1 March. We still have measures, so that means that we simply had to prepare for a fifth extension decision for the period from 1 March to 1 June. That will be published in the Official Journal tomorrow. The Approval Act will be filed soon thereafter."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2022-02-22-eerstekamer-18.u99", "speech text": "Then let us not enter this particular case. The only case in which permission should be given to allow the court to look at the content of the documents is if confidentiality is invoked by the government. In other cases that permission does not need, because then all the documents are always with the other party. In short, it is about inequality here. It's nice that the judge can see by consent, but it's still much better for your defense if you know what you're being accused of saying: that's right-- and that's not why."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2022-02-23-tweedekamer-6.u13", "speech text": "Then we agree. I'd like to present something to you. We're probably going to a 90% government debt. The CPB passed that on. The interest rate on public debt in 1991 was more than 9%. It was almost 10%. We also had 5% in 2008. This is a simple calculation. Suppose the ECB is forced to raise interest rates in the future perhaps to the 9% or 10% it has ever been, do you acknowledge that we will then have to pay huge interest on our sovereign debt? Then it becomes untenable. Because if you pass it on, for example, we will have to pay 9% of GDP interest on sovereign debt. That's six times the defense budget. Surely you must agree with me that the Netherlands cannot even pay for this?"}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2022-02-28-tweedekamer-3.u148", "speech text": "Mr. Chairman. We must also realise that the modern way of war has changed dramatically. Europe must therefore take concrete steps to strengthen its resilience to hybrid warfare and to prevent the spread of disinformation. This means an integrated approach to disinformation, support for independent journalism across Europe and an effective, supranational European cyber defense with a mandate for offensive cyber actions. My question is what the cabinet is like on the other side. Finally, Mr President. President Zelensky is applying for EU membership. Among other things, Von der Leyen and Poland are in favour of negotiations on EU membership of Ukraine. Ukraine is a part of democratic Europe. Will the cabinet seriously consider this option? Will the Netherlands show Ukraine and Russia that Europe is not abandoning its allies and its values? Thank you, Mr. Chairman."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2022-02-28-tweedekamer-3.u322", "speech text": "Thank you for the words of appreciation just said by Mrs Piri. Whether these weapons have been deployed, I can't confirm now. Of course, that's something I have monitored closely. I understand Mrs Piri's question, but at the moment I cannot say that. Let's agree that I'll inform the Chamber about this kind of thing, publicly if possible and confidentially if necessary. Maybe I can just keep going right now. Mrs Piri rightly said that we see the situation unfolding. The situation is, of course, constantly evolving. We know that at present the regional capitals are still under Ukraine's control, that there is strong pressure from Russian land-based units and components and that there is also an intensification of the Russian operation. This can change at any time. We work cards. I have here a map that is unclassified, I say to everyone who has questions about it, on which we keep a close eye on the military developments and thus remain up-to-date on these developments. But it is also important to say that I will only be able to come out with information if it is also confirmed on our side. This is very often not the case at the time when social media or the media are reporting on matters. The situation as I know it now is that the Russian forces have not yet managed to reach Kiev, but that they are approaching close. The front line is about 25 kilometers northwest of Kiev. That means they've reached the edge of the suburbs of Kiev. Then back to what it was often about today, the nuclear threat. Indeed, if Putin announces that the Russian strategic nuclear deterrent force will be put in a higher state of preparedness, it will be the first time since the end of the Cold War that the state of preparedness of the Russian strategic nuclear force will be increased by the public and in a conflict situation. That is a political signal that is clear and extremely worrying. With this step, I think we can say that Putin has just crossed a line again. This also shows the contours of a new post-conflict security paradigm. We are, of course, very concerned about that. At the same time, it is also incredibly important that we de-escalate, call for de-escalation and not go along in another step on the escalation ladder. Mr Van Dijk's question, which was on this subject, I should like to answer in this way. It's very disturbing, it's also unacceptable. We take it seriously, but we remain calm in our alliance and we do what needs to be done. What needs to be done is to give that support to Ukraine. We have also informed you over the last few days about what the Netherlands is doing. We have informed you about the weapons and military goods that the Netherlands supplies to Ukraine. The provision of such military support remains of real importance in the current circumstances. That is firstly because it enables Ukraine to exercise its legitimate right to self-defense. They have that legitimate right. Perhaps I can say that in addition to what has just been said in the debate on the interruption. Countries under attack have a legitimate right to self-defense. The aid we are sending is actually determined by Ukraine's demand. We are in contact with the Ukrainians about this. The additional material that has been made available in recent days indicates the seriousness of the situation. You have seen that the Netherlands is not only in this, but that several countries are now doing so, including those that previously chose to supply non-defension equipment. We strive to deliver to the equipment as soon as possible. We do that together with allies. On Sunday afternoon, a cargo took off with an air cargo to a collection site in the border area. We're communicating about that, too. Questions have just been asked about this. It's important to communicate about that. Of course, careful consideration must always be given. Can we communicate transparently without taking operational risks? That was the case here. So transparent where you can, and if you can't, you won't hear about it. I would like to stress that communicating on this issue is firstly to support Ukraine and secondly to strengthen our message, including to Russia. Then there are questions about the effects of supplying weapons. First of all, what is the effect of displacement on one's own organisation? This has already been requested in previous debates. I have said that it is almost impossible to supply weapons, or military goods, without any kind of displacement effect. So there must be an opinion on that. The military judgment when it comes to delivering is that it's possible. I've reported that to the Chamber before, including in the letters. That was the delivery of the sniper weapons, the stinger anti-aircraft missile systems and the Panzerfaust anti-tank weapons. Then we'll address the DOD's operational stash. It has displacement effects, but they are limited. The Defense Department will ensure that those supplies are quickly replenished. Mr. Chairman. Then there is Mr Brekelmans' question as to whether the budget is perhaps an obstacle to what we can or cannot deliver. At present, the budget is not an obstacle to material support. As I said, it is made available from the stocks that are there and we are going to supplement them. In addition, we saw yesterday that the European Union took a decision on addressing the European Peace Facility. This is an aid package of 500 million, of which 450 million is intended for lethal aid. The remaining 50 million is for fuel, medical facilities, protective clothing and that sort of thing. What we've already delivered, we've covered from the cabinet. That's what the Chamber was informed about. We're still looking for additional supplies. In that case, it will also be ensured that there is cover for this. Finally. Mrs Simons asked to ensure on this point that the material we send does not lead to civilian casualties. I would like to stress that we are doing this because we want to help Ukraine defend itself against Russian aggression. There is only one culprit to what is happening now, and that is Putin, who has sent his armed forces to Ukraine with these enormous amounts of weapons and units for no reason whatsoever. So it's in the context of self-defense. But, of course, in a war situation, you can never completely rule out civilian casualties. It is entirely intended that the weapons can only be used by the Ukrainian armed forces to defend themselves against the Russian armed forces. Unfortunately, I cannot guarantee 100%. This whole war, of course, has enormous risks and requires victims on the Ukrainian side. We're just watching it happen."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2022-02-28-tweedekamer-3.u325", "speech text": "It's hard to say. At least it's not a matter of weeks or weeks. What can be a matter of short notice is that we just don't have it anymore. But we're not the only country that supplies weapons. In the meantime, almost all European countries and other non-European NATO alliance members are doing so. So it's delivered from all sides. There is also intensive cooperation in transport and actual transfer. So a system has actually started, and I'm assuming that you can maintain such a supply for a long time to come. Of course, we do not know exactly how the situation will develop and how much longer it will be necessary. But let me say that I think that the financial bottleneck is not the first bottleneck that arises. That's more like the bottleneck of whether it's still available at all. I am talking about the short term in the long term, of course. How do you use resources and what resources do you use? But I'll get back to you on that. I would first like to say a few words about cyber, the hybrid warfare and the disinformation warfare, which we also see. I will begin with the Ukrainian request for support in cyber. That request came in on 18 February. We had talked about this before. I have already informed the Chamber that the Netherlands is participating in the EU's rapid response team. That's the PESCO project. We decided, immediately after Ukraine's request had come, with the participating countries to honour that and to activate that rapid response team led by Lithuania. There was also contact with Ukraine and a delegation was to travel to Kiev. The day the attack took place, the whole plan had to go back overboard. There's still a search for a way. The various participants in the team are in contact with each other and there is as good and as angry as that can be kept in contact with Ukraine to see how this support can be given in a different way. In any case, the Department of Defense has cybersecurity specialists available to help. That was about Ukraine's specific request. Questions have also been asked, among others, by Mr Brekelmans and Mr Van der Staaij, about what we can do at all against cyber attacks, not only in Ukraine, but also in the Netherlands. Mr Van der Staaij also added that I believe that we should not look at the legislation we have on this issue. We have already said interdepartmentally before the attack, when the whole situation began to sign off, that we need to intensify on this point; we need to take account of those cyber attacks. The Prime Minister also said just now: that is one of the scenarios we are prepared for. That is what he said in reply to Mr Omtzigt's question. The answer to that is indeed yes. So we do that interdepartmentally. Furthermore, the services are of course investigating the threat posed by countries with an offensive cyber program. We've reported that to the Chamber before. Russia is one of those countries. So cyber operations are just part of Russia's military strategy. It is very important to have the best possible view of that threat, preferably naturally before it materializes. For this purpose, the services can use different powers. They have those powers. They're in the law, too. However, we have recently noted that this was under the previous cabinet that we are currently encountering some bottlenecks in the work of the services in the cyber domain, just because of the speed. How can you do the work just as quickly as the other one, so to speak, makes the preparations? We would very much like to find a solution to this in the form of a temporary law, so that we make the work of the services and the supervisory system fit for that dynamic cyber domain. I believe that the current situation is encouraging us to proceed with this as soon as possible. Mr. Chairman. Mrs Koekkoek van Volt also asked whether Europe is taking concrete steps to improve resilience in the cyber domain and in relation to hybrid warfare. She talked about supporting independent journalism, an integrated approach to disinformation, and she also talked about the possibility of perhaps organising a supranational cyber defense. I think the strengthening of resilience is extremely important. There is the Strategic Compass that the EU is preparing now and also the NATO strategic concept in preparation. It really takes steps in the area of cybersecurity, within the EU, within NATO. The same applies to addressing disinformation. The same applies to investing in good proactive, factual communication, including from, for example, EEAS and NATO. What is not being worked on directly is a joint cyber resilience in the form of that supranational cybersecurity approach. It's complicated. International law applies, of course, also to the cyber domain, but an offensive cyber response is actually allowed in very few cases. As we work in the Netherlands, it is actually all covered by the intelligence work. The intelligence work is to a large extent a national competence. So it is very difficult to organise that supranationally. What is possible, and crucial, is that the intelligence services work together internationally. There are possibilities there. It is also possible to capture cyber effects within NATO when it comes to military missions. But that's as far as it goes. Mr Sjoerdsma suggested that more information should also be shared within NATO. Maybe I can answer that question right away. I would suggest that the Court be informed of this point through the appropriate channels. So that's a commitment I'm happy to make. Then NATO and readiness. We all saw the NATO summit last Friday. That was not only the 30 NATO alliance members, but also the High Representative of the EU. Finland was there with the Prime Minister and Sweden was there. NATO plus these three have also shown that there is consensus. NATO has once again stressed that NATO guarantees the security of all allies and that it considers cooperation with the EU, Finland and Sweden to be very important. I also believe that we must realise that the collective defence of our territory and therefore of the Netherlands can only be achieved in cooperation with others. So that's crucial. On Friday at the NATO summit, the leaders also made a political decision to enable SACEUR, the highest Allied Commander Europe, to activate NATO Response Force. That's the so-called flash power that's been reported about. SACEUR has been and immediately has been able to do so. That is, of course, a very exceptional situation, but it is important. It means that NATO can also act more quickly. That is wise in the present circumstances, I think. It's called At the Speed of Relevance in NATO language. The current circumstances justify this step, which is without precedent. It has never happened that NATO has activated this flash power, and that indicates the seriousness of the situation as far as I am concerned. Prime Minister Rutte stressed at the emergency session that the Netherlands is ready to make its military contribution to the allergic deterrent and defence. I would like to add that, of course, we always inform the Chamber. In advance if that is possible, and if it is not possible for reasons of speed and time, then at least as soon as possible. There were a number of questions about what Defense can do quickly to further increase readiness in the very short term. There are real possibilities for that. I immediately asked what they were. That is, of course, an increase in urgency in the current circumstances. In any case, we are going to ensure that we increase stocks of spare parts more quickly. We're going to continue to replenish the ammunition supplies. Where there are real problems in the mansion, we're gonna see how you can hire extra people faster. We're also going to look at strategic air transport, because there's a bottleneck there. These are the things that must be done, at least in the short term, to ensure that we can meet what NATO is asking of us. Mr. Chairman. Then there is European defence cooperation. As I said, the EU was represented at the NATO summit. Cooperation between the EU and NATO is actually more intense than ever before. Many EU Member States are members of NATO. I have seen how this whole situation has led the EU to become geopolitical. The meeting I was just at, which meant I wasn't here for a while, was a meeting of the Foreign Affairs Council in the composition of the Defence Ministers. I'll say something about that in a moment. However, this indicates that EU cooperation is crucial, especially if there is a problem at the edge of our European Union. We have already discussed with each other, including in the Chamber, the importance of boosting EU defence cooperation and defence policy. This concerns, for example, the joint acquisition of defence capacity through the EU and the European Defence Fund. It is also about using the European Peace Facility, which perhaps, when we spoke a week or three ago, we could not have suspected that it has already been released to supply arms to Ukraine. So that's how fast it can go. An important decision was taken yesterday by the European Council. It is also about European cooperation on the cyber domain, the hybrid threat. The Netherlands assumes its responsibility there. That's what we talked about in today's wired RBZ. We spoke, of course, about what is happening in Ukraine today. We talked about what we can do as Member States and how we can do it in a coordinated manner. I find it extraordinary how we have been able to discuss and coordinate this with each other in three days. I also find it very special, as I said, that we have now made the 500 million from the European Peace Facility available as aid to Ukraine. I think that says a great deal about European defence cooperation as it is developing and Mr Klaver pointed out, among other things. Mrs Koekkoek asked about the island of Gotland in the Baltic Sea. Putin speaks about other countries, including Sweden and Finland. He says that if they took the step to apply for membership of NATO, it would have adverse consequences for them. Those are, of course, unacceptable statements. That has just been said by both colleagues. Each country may decide its own future and also express its interest in becoming an alliance member. Sweden and Finland are not at the moment, but they are very important partners. Gotland is a Swedish island. NATO is working militaryly with Sweden in the framework of European security. There's practice together. The JEF, the Joint Expeditionary Force, is also working with about ten Nordic countries, including Sweden and Finland. They're not members of NATO. The other JEF countries are members of NATO. But there has already been a very extensive start with mainly joint exercises. One of them is about to start again and we're just gonna keep doing that. NATO works militaryly with Sweden and the Netherlands works militaryly with Sweden. There's practice. For that particular island, Sweden has itself taken measures to strengthen it. I cannot, of course, make any further announcements about this. Sweden can always ask other countries to help. For example, Article 42.7 of the EU provides a hook for this. Mr. Chairman. Then the last part, and then maybe I'll come up with a few loose questions. The VVD, SGP, JA21 and Volt have asked some questions about the NATO 2% standard. I think it's a good thing to say that this cabinet has already made a strong contribution by putting 25% extra on the defense side. Structurally, EUR 3 billion will be added. We are going to take great steps to improve readiness, to improve employability and to increase combat power. Part of the money will go to operational support. It'll go to new capacity. It will go to people and also to means. I believe that the current war in Ukraine shows us that the threats are real and close. The security situation is deteriorating as a result. That is undoubtedly true. We are also faced with other diverse and complex threats, also elsewhere in the world, which sometimes have to do with Russia. It is clear to me that the situation has changed dramatically. That may mean that it must have financial consequences. I would be happy to map out for the Chamber exactly what that would mean. We must ensure that the armed forces are future-proof, even in the longer term. That means that we should want to take additional steps for that longer term to see how we can grow to that NATO standard. Again, my commitment to the Chamber is the following. I don't want to talk about amounts right now. I interpret the question in such a way that the Chamber would like to know exactly what we are talking about in the financial sense. I like to map that, also because there are still new figures coming around the CEP. Then it gets a little more precise than when I do that here off-the-cuff. I would like to say that it is not just about money. It's also about absorption capacity and spending money. It's also about rules. It's about procurement rules. It's about laws and regulations. It's about things that are different for the Defense Department, because there may be problems with the sound room during practice or because there may be problems with building and maintaining the nitrogen rules. That is something that has been highlighted in the coalition agreement. So that is not something new and that has not changed now, but it does say something about how quickly you are able to use the additional resources from the government agreement and any reinforcements of it. Finally, unless Mr Brekelmans still had an interruption on this point."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2022-03-10-tweedekamer-12.u23", "speech text": "Thank you to Mr Van Dijk for asking this question, because I would have liked to have explained it, but I did not have enough time to do so. As far as I am concerned, we have seen this in other countries too. So it is not the case that we, or anyone else, can force that with air defense. I see that the diplomatic debate is now making rather extreme proposals, such as a general ceasefire. I see that there is a negative response to this. At the same time, I also see that it is not now possible for people to find a safe place in Ukraine, because the whole country may be bombed and even humanitarian corridors are being shot at. So my question is: could this be an intermediate step that Ukraine and Russia should finally meet together, possibly with a mediator? In any case, that is something that these two parties should bring about and not something that is enforced by Western or other parties. Because then we are directly involved and we do not want to be involved."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2022-03-10-tweedekamer-12.u82", "speech text": "Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Ukrainian cities are being shot in ruins. This afternoon the news came that the tanks moving towards Kiev have already been spotted near the suburbs of Kiev. Millions of refugees are drifting and there is a dark cloud hanging over our economy. There are more and more attacks affecting the civilian population. That is extremely poignant. The PVV condemns this again. Can the Minister confirm the announcement that President Zelensky no longer wants to press for NATO membership of Ukraine and is also prepared to negotiate the status of the Donbas regions and of Crimea? Does the Minister agree with me that this opens up a diplomatic solution and should therefore be strongly supported by the international community? Has the government confirmed its support for this to Zelensky? Of course, we all want the violence to stop as soon as possible, but what does not help is Dutch and European politicians throwing extra oil on the fire. It is distasteful that some people smell an opportunity to push over the smoking Ukrainian ruins another agenda, namely for more European Union, for a Ukrainian NATO and EU membership, for a European army and for fighter jets for Ukraine. The PVV really thinks that this is totally irresponsible and dangerous. Just because Putin behaves recklessly doesn't mean that stupid behavior should be copied by us. By \"us,\" I mean the politicians from the Western countries. Where is the rest and the reason, then I wonder. Just pull a line on NATO membership and EU membership for Ukraine. Then it's clear. Then Mr. Zelensky also knows exactly where he's at those points. I'd like a reaction from the government. Mr. Chairman. The PVV has been warning against a war of sanctions for a long time. We're not gonna win anything, but we're gonna lose big. From Vladivostok to The Hague, ordinary citizens suffer from this. They are financially ruined, while Mr Putin does not care at all. However, the government wants to intensify that war of sanctions further. The Foreign Minister said, as I read, that all options for sanctions are on the table, including an import ban on Russian oil and gas. I would like to say to the cabinet: don't do that. I call on them not to. I would also like to ask whether it has been calculated what such a ban will cost the Dutch citizen extra. Then the military aspect of this war. Of course, we hope that the brave Ukrainians will hold on to this misunderstanding, even though it would only be to keep that grain barn out of Putin's hands. We must help the Eastern NATO allies who suffer from past trauma. They are our military allies. NATO would, of course, not be credible if we did not give these countries additional support. The PVV therefore looks positively at the measures to strengthen the eastern flank of the alliance. A Dutch Patriot air defense system is going to Slovakia. At least that's in preparation. The question then is whether our defense forces have enough air defense systems left to defend our own territory. What if we have to protect our own strategic interests, such as the port of Rotterdam, in further escalation of this whole situation? Can we still do that? I'd like a response. Mr. Chairman. Finally, the PVV wishes to reiterate and emphasise the need to end Putin's aggression as soon as possible. We do not believe that this is possible by increasing economic and military pressure. Putin has nothing to lose and will, I fear, react with increasing violence. That would be terrible, and we really shouldn't have that. That is why I call on the cabinet now to focus on diplomacy on all fronts."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2022-03-10-tweedekamer-12.u271", "speech text": "Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The battle in Ukraine is hardened. The stories we hear from the war zone really go through marrow and bone. I can only express my disgust at the horrible images we see from Marioepol. Putin's attack is incredibly brutal. People are forced to leave home and fireplace, if that's still there. More than 2 million people are on the run. Many have said this evening that it is heartwarming to see how the Netherlands sympathises and shows solidarity. We saw it in the action of Giro555. We also see it in all kinds of initiatives that people take. The war is affecting all of us. It also has a major impact on our military and on their families. I visited Romania early this week. There's a company of 11 Air Mobile Brigade, participating in an exercise, along with our allies there. They feel that proximity. The same applies to the people who sailed last Sunday to be part of the Standing NATO Maritime Group 1. This concerns Rotterdam and the Seven Provinces. They too know that they are going somewhere where they can be called up by NATO if necessary. And the people on the quay feel that, too. So it's different for them. That's because of the terrible war. Mr. Chairman. First of all, I wanted to say something about how we look at the situation in Ukraine and answer a few questions about it. Then I come to a few comments on defence expenditure and the questions that have been asked about it. Then NATO. Then there is the support we give to Ukraine. Then there are questions about the EU. I think I've had everything I need. Much will, of course, be in line with the questions that Mr Hoekstra has just answered. The situation is, of course, evolving. You all read in the media that Kiev is still under Ukraine's control. After the initial surprise effect, the pace of the Russian fundamental offensive has declined significantly in the beginning. In any case, the courageous and persistent action of Ukrainian military forces has the effect that the Russian advance to Kiev seems to be much slower than planned and expected, with only sporadic terrain gains and an almost stable front line. Nevertheless, the attempt is, of course, clear. Putin is slowly but surely trying to include Kiev with the Russian troops, with the ultimate goal of conquering that city and occupying the government center. There are mainly several other Ukrainian cities surrounded, among others Marioepol of which we have seen these images. So there are often very heavy fights taking place in and around those cities. They also use heavy weapons. You'd expect this image to go on like this in the next few days, and possibly get worse. A number of members today asked about the potential risks of using chemical and biological weapons. We've already seen the cluster bombs. Mr Hoekstra has just answered the questions. We know the Russian army has those thermobaric weapons. We also know that Russia does not hesitate to deploy chemical weapons. In other words, we certainly cannot exclude that commitment. It has not yet been said that it is going to happen. I don't want to speculate on that either. Of course, that doesn't help the situation. But we have heard today from the British and American allies that they actually have a bit of the same assessment: the use of chemical weapons fits in with that schematic that is sometimes applied, even with a false flag first and then bet. Then there are the questions about the nuclear military part. Mr Sjoerdsma, Mrs Mulder and Mr Dassen asked for this. That nuclear threat was simply expressed by Putin, by Russian leadership. That's rhetoric, nuclear rhetoric, but nuclear rhetoric is dangerous and objectionable. I think it's very important that we don't go along with that. The cabinet has always said that. We always take all the scenarios into account. It is actually NATO's core business to do so, but nuclear escalation is not the issue. The commitment of the Netherlands is to prevent escalation and further escalation, which is in line with Minister Hoekstra. In the Netherlands, we have a decision-making structure and crisis plans for this. Several departments are involved in this. But again, it's not something we're preparing for right now. Mr. Chairman. Then there are the comments that have been made on defence expenditure. We talked about this last week, of course, in the debate. The cabinet has already taken significant steps, but the Russian invasion of Ukraine simply means a change in the security situation. This has dramatically deteriorated. We have to bear in mind that this can continue for a long time to come. There are consequences. This has consequences for the Netherlands. So it can't be without consequences for the defence budget. We discussed that at the time. We have seen the historic step taken by the Germans. That really is a huge investment in the German armed forces. We can see that in more countries. We have also seen it with the Danes and with the Swedes. There is therefore a clear mandate for the cabinet, namely that we must speed up the strengthening of our armed forces. We must invest in cooperation with allies: European allies and allies in NATO. We need to map out what more is needed. The current situation not only shows the importance of it, but also gives it even more urgency. The Chamber has also expressed this in the Sjoerdsma motion. As far as I am concerned, the starting point is: what do we think our armed forces should be able to do? What do we want to achieve together with our allies? I've already agreed to give the Chamber an insight into this. We're working on the short term. We'll see what we can do to raise the readiness faster. We must, of course, also ensure that we get a good idea of this on the defence side, so that we can decide on it within the cabinet. We must be ambitious, but also realistic about what we can achieve quickly. We have to ask ourselves how we can plan in a realistic way so that we can best shape spending. In other words, we really need to make sure, in the coming period, that we can also make good and efficient investments in the long term in order to ensure that the armed forces are future-proof. This also includes a good mapping of how we can work more closely with our European partners. So we need to look at how we can do better and how we can strengthen each other within the organisations we are in, NATO and the EU, and with our national partners. I think that is an answer to Mrs Van der Plas' question, namely: what are we doing with the Sjoerdsma motion? Mr. Chairman. There were a number of questions about NATO. Firstly, there was a question from Mr Sjoerdsma. But Mr De Roon and Mrs Mulder also asked: what about our collective defence? This is, of course, one of the main tasks of the Dutch armed forces and the task of NATO. We have, of course, already taken steps as NATO. The Netherlands also participated in this. The reinforced air-policing, the increased readiness of the reaction force and the strengthening of NATO units on the east flank are all rapid reinforcements designed to strengthen and improve NATO's tasks of deterrent and defence. The use of fighter aircraft for air-policing over Eastern Europe has been extended until the end of the month. I would like to clarify one point. In the second half of this month we will only contribute to this with F-16's, so no longer with the F-35's. They are going to contribute to air-policing in Bulgaria, as already announced. But that happens in April, May. We are preparing with Germany the deployment of a Patriot air defense unit in Slovakia. This concerns about 150 Dutch soldiers. The Chamber has also been informed about this. The final decision will fall after Slovakia has also given the green light. That's all being prepared now. We are indeed investigating, together with the French and the Belgians, but at the request of NATO and the French, a possible military contribution from the Netherlands to a Battlegroup in Romania. Of course, we have to look at what we can and what the impact is on our armed forces. Next week we have a meeting of NATO Defence Ministers. Further plans for this reinforcement are being worked out within NATO. We will, of course, always have to look at how the Netherlands can contribute to this. But these are the main directions. We're going to build on that, of course. Mr De Roon said that he is concerned about the defence of our own territory if we make a great deal of effort on the eastern flank of Europe. I think it is best to defend the Netherlands by defending Europe's eastern flank. Because the NATO border is there and the threat is there too. So everything we can do there to discourage and defend is the defence of the Netherlands. I was in Lithuania and said that this is not only your border, but this is also our border."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2022-03-10-tweedekamer-12.u275", "speech text": "I would like to stress how it works, technically, but also militaryly. Everything that comes in our direction comes in from somewhere, too. So you need your air defense where it's most effective. That's on the eastern border of the NATO area."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2022-03-10-tweedekamer-12.u276", "speech text": "I'd like to continue with that. That is all true, but I am concerned about the situation in which the situation is completely out of hand and where it may not even be so relevant anymore what is happening at that eastern border, because it could then be extended across Europe. If they're out of control in the Kremlin, that could happen. That's what my question is about. Do we still have enough air defense in the Netherlands for the defence of the vitals, for example the port of Rotterdam? I just want an answer to that question."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2022-03-10-tweedekamer-12.u410", "speech text": "Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'd like to answer one more question. That was Mr Brekelmans' question on the coordination of aid measures. I mentioned the European Peace Facility. It is true that there is a slight form of coordination under this heading, but it remains, of course, that it concerns bilateral requests to individual countries, i.e. to Member States of the European Union or NATO allies. It's a bilateral matter. There is, of course, mutual contact with important countries, such as the United States and the United Kingdom. I would like to say a few words about three motions. First of all, the motion in part No. 31. That is the motion tabled by Mr De Roon and Mr Van Haga in connection with the debate on aircraft defence. There is one point I would like to make of a misunderstanding. It is not the case that the Netherlands brings a full Patriot unit to Slovakia. We have been asked to contribute to that of the Germans. I need to be specific. As far as the motion is concerned, my point is that we are members of an alliance. That's what's for the collective defense of our territory. An attack on one is an attack on all. It is precisely through this cooperation that we protect the Netherlands. If the Chamber wants to know exactly what is being used, what is available in the Netherlands and whether it is about the whole air force or the whole military force, the Chamber will always be informed about it. I will never deny the Chamber any information, but the Cabinet does not agree with the position below. That's why I'm dissuading the motion. Then the motion to part No. 35, on the European army. Of course, it has been pointed out very often. It has also been said very often by the cabinet: there is no European army in existence, no more than there is a NATO army. The Strategic Compass doesn't mention that at all. We have a single set of forces. We'll put the units where they're needed. That could be in the UN context. That could be NATO. This could be at EU level. The motion is therefore superfluous. We don't recommend it."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2022-03-23-tweedekamer-8.u52", "speech text": "That war is terrible. We agree on that and Putin must be stopped. But I didn't support that motion. That was precisely because of the arguments I just gave. It would be nice if you would take that up, namely that the European countries together already invest many times more in defence than Russia. And we are not even talking about the United States and NATO. They invest a lot more in defense. Maybe it's not in dollars. In collaboration, you might find some improvement. That call to invest billions more in defence now does not follow my party. A thrifty party like the VVD might have to think twice about that, too, wouldn't it?"}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2022-03-23-tweedekamer-8.u113", "speech text": "Mr. Chairman. Two issues are being discussed at the European Summit tomorrow and the day after tomorrow, which Forum for Democracy is very concerned about. The first is the negotiation of an international pandemic treaty. We have received many e-mails about this from citizens. The Dutch are right to be very concerned about this. Why? Because such a legally binding international convention enables the World Health Organisation to guide health policy in our country in the event of a pandemic. If the European Union signs such a convention on behalf of the Member States, the World Health Organisation may, as soon as there is a pandemic according to the same World Health Organisation, impose legally binding health measures on the European Union to combat it, which the European Union then imposes on our country by means of European regulations, which the Netherlands must transpose into its own legislation. Of course we lose control of our health policy during a pandemic. In this way, we allow globalists to dictate what we need to do through the World Health Organisation in the event of a pandemic. The same World Organisation that announced January 14, 2020 that there was no evidence of human-to-human infection in corona. The same World Health Organization that is responsible for the great coronabedrog by classifying a virus with the mortality of a flu as a pandemic. And now we are going to start negotiations that give the World Health Organisation the power to dictate what we should do in a pandemic. Absurd! We would like to hear from the Prime Minister what red line he is going to pull in the sand to prevent the Netherlands from being handed over defenselessly to the World Health Organisation in the event of a pandemic. Are we even sovereign at all? Will the Dutch Government be forced by the World Health Organisation to impose a lockdown in the event of a pandemic? And how will the Prime Minister prevent the Netherlands, under the guise of inclusiveness, from handing over medicines and protective equipment to other countries in the event of a pandemic in the future? And what is also very important: how is he going to ensure and guarantee that the World Health Organisation can never and never impose a vaccination obligation on our country in the event of a pandemic? I have already said that many Dutch people are quite rightly very concerned about this. Mr. Chairman. The second topic on which we are very concerned at this summit concerns the further development of a European army. It's been mentioned a few times. There are already 18 so-called EU battalions of as many as 60,000 men, in which the armies of different European countries work together. However, these battalions are not, in principle, permanent and are managed and paid by the relevant EU countries. On the other hand, the European summit will discuss the creation of a permanent European intervention force of 5,000 people. This intervention force is paid and controlled from Brussels. If this is not a European army, then what is? That is my question to the Prime Minister. A week ago, this Chamber voted by a majority against the creation of such a European army. It's been mentioned a few times. My question to the Prime Minister is: why did he nevertheless agree to the creation of this European intervention force? In fact, if we can believe the Minister of Defence, the Netherlands is even at the forefront of this. Does the Prime Minister agree with us that, in the long term, such a European army will inevitably become a European army under German leadership, especially with the departure of the United Kingdom from the European Union and a EUR 1 000 billion re-armed Germany? Does the Prime Minister see this risk? In short, and in conclusion, it is clear that the Democracy Forum does not want a legally binding pandemic treaty with which we surrender to the World Health Organisation. We are mordicus against the formation of a European army. Our democracy, our freedom, our self-determination and our sovereignty, in short, our future and that of our children, are at stake. That is why we must leave globalist institutions, such as the European Union and the World Health Organisation, which are fundamentally threatening all of this, as soon as possible. Thank you, Mr. Chairman."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2022-03-23-tweedekamer-8.u154", "speech text": "Again, I understand very well what Mr Sjoerdsma is saying and I think that the scenario contained in his questions is a imaginable scenario, without saying that that is the scenario. I do not want to make a harsh statement about this either, because that is ultimately a matter that should be dealt with in the legal column, i.e. at the ICC and elsewhere. The Netherlands is one of the initiators of establishing a coordination mechanism between all the different initiatives that exist around truth finding. We have initiatives at the UNHCR, at the UN itself, but we are also working very hard in other places to collect and log material, so that we can identify human rights violations and make them part of this whole process. It must then take place. It can lead to a certain outcome. Mr Sjoerdsma outlines an outcome that is conceivable, but I do not want to make a categorical statement about it. This does not increase the chances of a successful course of justice. He can do that as a parliamentarians, but I think I need to be a little more careful about that. Mr President, a few more things. The Dutch arms supplies. We will continue to do everything we can to help Ukraine. Several deliveries have taken place. We'll see what we can do at a time based on the requests that exist. The Chamber shall be informed of this confidentially. Then, like you, I heard that Ryabkov, the Deputy Minister, said on 12 March that the Western arms shipments are classified as a legitimate target. That position was also expressed by Ambassador Sjoelgin. That is, of course, diametrically opposed to our view. Ukraine has the right to self-defense against this illegal invasion of the Russian Federation. In this context, arms supplies take place. That is also in line with the UN Charter. So these Russian threats are unwise. They are dangerous and NATO is very alert, in order to be able to defend the territory on the all-encompassing side. That is, once again, the qualification. Then there is Ukraine's wish for candidate status. You also saw the Versailles Declaration on this. The request was sent very quickly to the Commission with a request for an opinion. It usually takes a lot longer. There was a difference of opinion. Let's be honest about that. After a discussion, the consensus in Versailles was ultimately that we should take note of this and that there is a procedure for this. There is no fast track to membership or candidate membership. There's no such thing. We also have the stability in the Western Balkans to weigh. There are, of course, great sensitivities surrounding this issue. That is why both must be done. The Commission must come to an opinion, with the next steps, and at the same time we must work hard to work within the existing frameworks to further deepen relations with Ukraine from the European Union. Although these countries are not now under machine gunfire and artillery fire, they are also very concerned about Moldova and Georgia. Serbia. We do indeed regret the Serbian reaction to the aggression of the Russian Federation. They did support the UN resolution. Hopefully that will give us a new momentum. I agree that you would expect more from a candidate country. Mrs Kamminga asked that question. Serbia has been called upon to do so at EU level and has been called upon to do so at all levels. The Netherlands also participated in the European Union's demarche in Belgrade on this issue. Mr. Chairman. I think that answers the questions about the diplomatic side of the matter. On this last point of the candidate countries, Minister Hoekstra also argued at the Foreign Affairs Council last Monday to increase the pressure further. That was in line with the Kuzu motion adopted here in the House of Representatives. That from my side at this point. I'll get to the sanctions in a minute."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2022-03-23-tweedekamer-8.u255", "speech text": "Everything we can prepare is being prepared, but at the moment Russia's aggression in Marioepol and elsewhere is such that it does not seem to me to be a passable road. The maximum you can do is to promote the corridors et cetera. I don't know the message about those 11 parties. I should check it out. I just don't know, and that's why I don't want to respond to rumors like that right now. I really need to be sure. Mr. Chairman. Maybe I can go straight to the core of the Strategic Compass. We have a number of initiatives in Europe, such as the EU training missions in Iraq, Mali and elsewhere. The purpose of the intervention force is not to stop the Russians or other major international conflicts. The purpose of this is to see if we, as Europe, can be able to do a few things ourselves in special situations, especially outside the NATO framework, but not, of course, in conflict with NATO. Think, for example, of evacuations or minor crisis operations. I think the situation in Kabul would have been too big a problem to solve with a rapid European intervention force. We have had a major problem there with the evacuation of nationals and others who depended on our protection. We intend to be able to carry out such operations as the European Union with this rapid reaction force in 2025, but that is, of course, completely separate from the defence of the territory and the NATO task. It's not a European army. The Netherlands has also made no proposals for the creation of a European army. There are no such proposals. Of course, participation always takes place on the basis of national decision-making, both on the provision of military services and capacity. So it does not replace the collective defence offered by NATO. Maybe I can also answer a few other questions right away, otherwise we will hear the question I might just want to answer again. In the Strategic Compass it is foreseen that this intervention force will be there in 2025, with 5,000 people. The Netherlands wants to contribute to this, because we think that this is a sensible addition to what Europe is doing, as I just outlined. Again, of course it remains a Dutch competence to participate or not. It also builds on the current EU Battlegroups. It's actually an improved version of what already exists. This could be used in evacuation missions or crisis management near Europe. Once again, it is not an army, nor is it in conflict with NATO. The decision-making process, Mrs Van der Plas and others asked for a Dutch competence. We then look each year at which countries choose to participate or stand by. Germany said it wants to be lead nation by 2025. That will therefore have to be a different country every year. Finally, another question from Mrs Kamminga on this issue. It has to do with NATO and additional troops to the east flank. That's right. Many additional measures have already been taken, such as the activation of defence plans and the higher readiness. Several allies are now working on a multinational basis on additional Battlegroups on the east flank. We are working with the French to see what we can do in Romania. In addition to the Romanian initiative, a Patriotic Air Defence Unit is planned to go to Slovakia in April. The expectation is that these Battlegroups will eventually be brought under the NATO flag, depending on military advice. Then they morph into, as it were, a kind of Enhanced Forward Presence. In the Baltic countries, by the way, there is also the ambition to enhance enhanced Forward Presence in enhanced forward defence. These are, of course, all decisions that we will have to take later. That would also mean more permanent presence. This discussion is ongoing, but I see it moving towards decision-making in June. So it is also a structural adjustment of the NATO posture, that is, our presence, to the eastern flank in the longer term. Then perhaps in that same context a few more things. Mrs Van der Plas asks: are you not afraid that NATO and EU responsibilities will bite each other? No, I don't think so. It's an en-en approach. Article 5 of NATO stands for our collective defence, and within the European Union it is wise that you are able to do things that are not directly related to your defence, but are related to what I just outlined, such as logistics operations, but also evacuations, for example. Mr Sjoerdsma asked: is that Strategic Compass enough for the longer term? I think we're really taking a few big steps here. That's what's needed. There is a collective awareness that we need to invest in security. Moreover, I believe that further cooperation within the European Union is really helping to make smarter use of our capabilities. Of course, you can already see the Netherlands working with Germany in a highly integrated way when it comes to the army. You see that in a lot of places. We also work with the Belgians in air defense, of course. I believe that the current crisis underlines the urgency of this EU defence cooperation. Then Mr Van Dijk asked: shouldn't we act hastily? It's always wise not to do that, but I don't think we do that here. We could not make the draft public, because we were bound by EU rules. But we have now shared the public appreciations of the five drafts and their policy implications with the Chamber. We have also discussed our commitment with the Chamber in advance of the Council meetings. The Sjoerdsma motion on the increase in defence expenditure calls for an investigation into whether there can be structural additional investment in defence, also in view of the 2% agreement with NATO members. This is in addition to the 25% additional defence expenditure from the coalition agreement. We know that motion. It's accepted, too. The possibilities for additional investment are now being mapped out by the Secretary of Defense. The Chamber shall be informed as soon as possible. We will then inform the Chamber at the latest of any additional resources for defence, or if possible earlier, for example in the Defence Note. The question was also how to prevent the situation from changing the whole security system by 2024. There have been elections in the United States again, and you don't know how that goes. I think you should say here that the transatlantic alliance is essential for European security. That's what this crisis shows. NATO remains the cornerstone of our collective defence and security. Our transatlantic approach remains crucial, hence the relationship with the United States and Canada, which are of great importance. Honestly, no matter who's in the White House. It goes beyond the White House. Think, for example, of the great support for NATO and European security in Congress. The Republicans and Democrats are also aware that if Russia were to have a greater influence in this part of Europe, it would ultimately have a major impact on the security of the United States. We only have to go back 80 years in history or we go back to the end of World War I to understand how crucial it is for the security of the United States that Europe is stable. So apart from historical ties and historical obligations, there is also a very pragmatic reason for the United States to continue to invest heavily in NATO, provided that we do so. That is why defence expenditure must also be increased. That's what we're lucky to do. This will also make the relationship with the United States more equal, more effective and thus more future-proof. Otherwise, it would naturally come under pressure in the long term. Finally, there was the question of private investment. I understand that this is about measures to improve the access of the defence industry to private finance. Then it's about access to loans from banks. That seems to me to be a good thing. We need a strong defence industry in Europe that can also be technologically successful. Mr. Chairman. Those were all the questions about the Strategic Compass. I have three outstanding questions left."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2022-03-23-tweedekamer-8.u258", "speech text": "Because that's not there for our protection and defense. This is there to achieve practical things: smaller crisis operations, evacuations, that sort of thing. For our defense, we have NATO."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2022-03-23-tweedekamer-8.u274", "speech text": "My guess is you're not due 2%. Then you will have to set up a European atomic power as America now offers. Then the French won't deliver either. The force the frappe isn't that big either. So you are talking about massive investments in the European nuclear power. You're talking about defense spending twice as much. I think you really have to go to 4% or 5% for the Netherlands if you want to survive without the transatlantic umbrella. I don't think that's possible. I think you really need to be real and that the Western world really needs to stand hand in hand to defend itself. Someone recently said very nicely that 'the Western world' is not only a geographical indication but also a cultural understanding of democracy, freedom and human rights. That's why this transatlantic relationship is so sacred. I really do not see how, in the long term, we as a Europe can provide structural protection without that American bond in NATO. I think you are really talking about huge spending and also about a huge expansion of our nuclear capacity, which in fact only France now has."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2022-03-31-tweedekamer-12.u27", "speech text": "What is being delivered to Ukraine are indeed gifts. I think we included that in the letter of inquiry. We'll give it to Ukraine. Nothing's coming back. The only question we keep asking ourselves is: do we finance it ourselves and, if so, from what resources will it be paid, or is it something that fits within the criteria of the funds made available at European level? But of course that is administered neatly on the cabinet side. Those are the two ways to finance the donations of military equipment. Mr. Chairman. Mr Kuzu van Denk asked about the possibility of contributing to the protection of citizens in the event of air strikes. If I understand him correctly, it was mainly about protecting Ukrainian citizens from air strikes, so in Ukraine itself. That is a debate that has been held here more often. Of the requests that have been made earlier about setting up a no-fly zone, NATO has said that we cannot do that without becoming part of the conflict ourselves. This has potentially very far-reaching consequences. So you can't. Anything that leads NATO to become active in Ukraine can't, because then you become directly party. What can be done is to supply military goods that enable Ukraine to defend itself against them. So that is how we can contribute to protecting citizens. Then there were a few questions before I got through the lyrics. Mr Van der Staaij of the SGP said that, in addition to what we are doing to support Ukraine, we may also need to increase our own defence efforts. Of course, we support Ukraine. We'll do what NATO wants us to do. We are, of course, also thinking with NATO about what is sensible. We have taken steps at European level when it comes to defence and security. The cabinet is very aware of the fact that the Chamber has also asked for this. There's a Sjoerdsma motion. Following the Sjoerdsma motion, the cabinet said that we need to see whether we can take further steps on top of what was already made available from the coalition agreement at the beginning of this cabinet, namely 3 billion structural and 10.7 billion for this cabinet period. We think this is relevant. The motion that has been passed here, of course, we will work out. We will also come up with proposals. Of course, you can see this in other countries, particularly in Europe. And, not unimportantly, you can also see this with our neighbours, the Germans, who, of course, have taken a big step and are just going to do the 2% for NATO. So the answer is: yes, we also think that we should increase our defence efforts. We believe that this is not so much because we believe that this is now contributing to the war in Ukraine, but because we want, in the long term, to get defence in order within the framework of NATO and the European Union. Of course, that will take time, but it is very important to do it. Mr Sjoerdsma asked about the long-term commitment. That was also about NATO. That was actually about the defense and, in particular, the reinforcement of the east flank. We are of course active in this, but Mr Sjoerdsma is right that these are in principle temporary contributions for the time being. This is also how eFP was launched in Lithuania. We've been there for five years. For example, we now have a commitment for Bulgaria's airspace. That's basically temporary. F-35s are going to fly there for two months in cooperation with others. The Patriots in Slovakia are in principle also a temporary commitment. I think this is also good in principle, because it allows you to switch very quickly. We flew within one and a half hours of the invasion. Then the first F-35 went into the air. The commitments for Bulgaria and Slovakia have also gone quickly. The development is very soon, early April. You can still make agreements about how you want to stick with NATO after that, but the first step has been taken. NATO is also considering the long-term strategy. At various meetings of the Foreign Minister and the Minister of Defence, and ultimately at the NATO Summit, a decision will have to be taken on how we see this in the slightly longer term."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2022-03-31-tweedekamer-4.u8", "speech text": "Mr. Chairman. President Zelensky just spoke words that will reverberate in this Parliament for a long time to come. The distance between Kiev and The Hague disappeared for a while and the war tension became palpable. He said, \"The hard fought peace was destroyed in one moment and now we must fight hard again.\" That is also our fight and that is why we need to do more, first and foremost military. President Zelensky asked for stingers and air defenses. My question to the Minister of Defence is what more can the Netherlands, European allies and NATO allies can do about it. Slovakia and Turkey have S-300 air defense systems, which are desperately needed, but they want NATO guarantees first before they are prepared to deliver them. Is the Netherlands prepared to commit itself for a long time to strengthening the eastern flank so that Slovakia can steer those systems? Sanctions: Will the State actually work with the Land Registry to deal with houses, yachts and other property and will the holes in the sanction law be closed, as the Chamber asked last week? Finally, Mr President. Of course, the Copenhagen criteria apply in full, but just now, also listening to President Zelensky's appeal, a European perspective for Ukraine on candidate membership is being called for. I think we should be willing to do so. That's why the next motion. [[Motion]] [[The Chamber,]] [[heard the debate,]] [[Mostly that Ukraine belongs to our European family;]] [[Mainly full compliance with the Copenhagen criteria;]] [[calls on the Government to agree to the status of candidate country for Ukraine,]] [[and goes to the order of the day.]] [[This motion has been proposed by Mr Sjoerdsma.]] [[She's getting No. kst-36045-47]]"}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2022-04-07-tweedekamer-3.u257", "speech text": "Yes, but you agreed in the coalition, at least Mrs Van den Berg, that that was because of two things. That was pretty much the defense line. I take it from this that you've forgotten something now. The minister felt pressured. That's what you've been able to read. The minister didn't want to be attacked in the media. Those weren't media, because Van Lienden didn't go anywhere until May and this happened in April. Then he only tweeted a few times. He's sending over those tweets, too. Do you agree with me that the reason for this is that he himself says that he wants that seller, Sywert van Lienden, to come in and actually be close to him? Is that what you're getting out of?"}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2022-04-07-tweedekamer-9.u46", "speech text": "I think we are now in the bizarre situation where Minister Hugo de Jonge is rewriting state law on his own. He has invited himself to this debate, and he himself has so evidently now, because that is what the Minister says, made a selection from the documents that the Chamber received yesterday. Pieces of what the Chamber has asked for before, but which we have not received, we have now been given because Minister De Jonge has insisted on it. The Minister now says that it is just a selection, a selection of documents, so you can assume that they are in the interest of Minister Hugo de Jonge. They therefore do not provide transparency and insight into what has actually happened. They are purely in the defense of the Minister. I would like to ask Minister Helder how it can be that we are in this bizarre situation that we have not received information that we should have had for a long time and that documents that apparently were there are now being sent to the Chamber on request and by order of Minister De Jonge. It just can't happen like that."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2022-04-07-tweedekamer-9.u232", "speech text": "I ask that because he actually did something that the Chamber has been asking for for a long time with the request to share it yesterday. Has he considered and considered that that is something that the Chamber has really been asking about for a long time and what didn't come? After his intervention, after his contact with the Minister, because he wanted to, I think that contributes to his defense, that was shared anyway."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2022-04-07-tweedekamer-9.u393", "speech text": "No, Mr. Chairman. Just no. The idea, the suggestion, that you could, that you could do that, that you would want to do that, is just a false suggestion and also a poisonous suggestion, because it affects your integrity, it affects the intention with which you do your job. The idea that a department works like this or that a minister works like this or that I work like this, that a party membership card at such a time, in which everyone is panicking in their eyes with \"how could we get more mouth caps?', That a party membership card matters at all, that idea, is just a reprehensible idea. And the reproach is a poisonous reproach, because you can hardly defend yourself against it either. What kind of defense could I mention here, which makes you say, \"Oh, here it is. No, then it has nothing to do with party politics.\"? I don't. So you're blaming it, and that's what keeps it sticking. You know that, and that's why you're using this accusation. There's no shred of evidence that any of this could be happening."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2022-04-07-tweedekamer-9.u500", "speech text": "Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Distrust is poison in our profession. That was about the entire reflection of the Minister for Housing that I asked for in my first term. As far as we are concerned, this is not a reflection, but an appeal to the Chamber not to dismiss the Minister. Instead of dealing today with the oh so urgent climate crisis, with the housing crisis or with the victims of the Tax Office, we have been busy all day with the minister who used the plenary to save his ministry. I had a debate today on our environment and I was unable to do so. That debate was about how we can have a healthier environment and how we can reduce the human impact on our nature. Instead, I have witnessed the classic Rutte defense for hours with the entire Chamber. As far as we are concerned, it looks something like this: apologize for a small, almost technical error, but have no active reminder of that fundamental error of systematically not informing the Chamber. And then create noise, a lot of noise, answer questions that have not been asked and philosophize for a long time about the meaning of a word. As far as we are concerned, that is precisely the poison of mistrust. On behalf of my group, I have signed the motion of censure. Not only does mistrust apply to this minister, but it is above all distrust of the way in which he is accountable. The way we know, among other things, from the 1 April debate and on which we have agreed not to do so anymore. Unfortunately, we have seen today that this is still not the case. Thank you."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2022-04-13-tweedekamer-11.u328", "speech text": "I fully agree with Mrs Bromet. Mrs Van Dijk from the CDA actually said the same thing. We do not have to hold a referendum every time. If there is simply a good, representative way of decision-making that also meets the broad wish of society, then you will not get a request for a referendum. Maybe someone can ask for a referendum, but then there is not enough support for it. So I totally agree with that. Then we'll go to the law of execution. Today, of course, it is basically about putting it into the Constitution, but a number of things have been asked about the implementing law. Mr Baudet referred to the fact that he would in advance distrust the majority here, because we would not allow that to happen. I don't have much confidence in that. When we are going to hold a referendum, we must organize it seriously. The defense at the moment is that we also seem wise to make agreements, for example, on how we deal with possible subsidies for the front and the counter camp. One of the lessons of the previous referenda is, of course, that this has not always gone well. I told you, you have to learn to refer. It is not my jargon, but it comes from this fine final report by the State Committee on Parliamentary System. I think we should also learn to have a good social debate again in order to be convinced sometimes. And then we come to the point of manipulation and disinformation. Mrs Van Dijk of the CDA asked for that and Mrs Koekkoek of Volt. Of course, disinformation is not just about populists. I also sometimes see something coming from the government that I think is: well, that is perhaps very rosy proposed. Let me give you an example of the Youth Act. The goal was to reduce the number of removals. Did you make it? The difference between will and execution or outcome is very large. But I think you should make some very good arrangements about that. As a society, we have to learn to talk about it again. I have said it before in the debate: you are also being put away very quickly. You can't be trusted or you're a conspiracy thinker. Guys, if you don't listen to each other that way, we won't get anywhere. Mrs Van Dijk called it listening democracy. It is not only listening, but of course it is also hearing and organizing. I firmly believe that referendums can also organise this social and political debate in society. That's something we may need to miss. We all see that gorges, as it is called today, are vastly deepened. People from different courses no longer meet, not at the supermarket, not at the association, not near. Of course, it would be very nice if a referendum were to be a means of listening to each other again. In that it is up to all of us to say, if we are talking about political blimps as if we were not a democracy, it is quite something, I think it is quite something that is said here that it is a pacifier or a judas region. This does not do justice to the initiators of this bill and the way in which we defended it in the first round, including in the First Chamber, and now again. It does not do justice to the value of parliament and to the value of a fundamental right as it is said: they are a bunch of half-threads, a bunch of pimps. Then you do exactly what the erosion of democracy is: no trust in democracy and in the strength of a common decision, even if you disagree. Then you're in the process of destruction and then you're knocking on the chest of your own right. That's okay, everybody has freedom of speech, but you don't contribute to solving serious issues with each other. We all want things to happen as political parties. We all have spearheads. There's gotta be room for everything. But by saying that someone who's defending a bill, you're delivering a judas trick, you're closing the door so hard that I'm really wondering, why are you still here, why are you still in it? Moreover, we can also suggest that the honourable Member who said this is also very often not participating. Mr President, I can already conclude."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2022-04-13-tweedekamer-11.u341", "speech text": "Mr Baudet contradicts himself so much in the endless sentences that it is almost no longer logical to answer Baudet. He appreciates that we're doing this, but it's still a judas trick. That's really weird. That's really weird human handling at all, but it's also just weird. Then he says: I am very much in favour of referenda, but this is so flawed that I am not in favour of it. I have just said in the defense, when you did not have the decency to listen here and exchange views with me, that we can of course listen to the results in a referendum that is not immediately binding and that we can have a debate on this. We can discuss in advance whether or not we take it seriously. It is important for the social debate to take place, in which there is an exchange of political ideas. That's the emancipating of our society, that people meet again. And Mr Baudet is throwing it out of here. He said in reply to Mr Van Nispen that he would approach it openly. Well, it wasn't, because it was already thrown away. Mr Baudet admitted that later. I think that's destructive politics. This is a two-thirds majority for something we have been doing for 37 years. 37 years ago, the Biesheuvel State Commission said: this is good. And then you would after 37 years, because Forum for Democracy believes that all issues are international... That's not true. We have a great deal of legislation here that deals with the wallet of people, the access of all kinds of facilities in the Netherlands, the welfare state or the participatory society. None of that has anything to do with all your international insights. We give a huge instrument to people, and yet you stand at the threshold of the breakthrough to destroy it on two arguments. I call that political blundering."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2022-04-19-eerstekamer-6.u627", "speech text": "Mr. Chairman. I too would like to begin by thanking the initiators. It has been said before: they have had a long journey. They're close to the target now. If you look at the debate, it is only a question of whether or not that goal is going to be achieved. I would also like to thank the Minister for the clear answers, including the questions raised by our group. The same goes for the Secretary of State. Thank you for that. Mr. Chairman. When we discussed my draft contribution in the group, we said: let us enter the debate with a bit of openness and say here and there that we have some doubts about the interpretation of the documents we had and the interpretation of ourselves. That's mainly because there's a lot of sympathy in this bill, because it's about kids. Very specific: it is about our own children and grandchildren. When I look at the debate, I've gone a little up and down in my mind. When I heard the first pieces of the defense, I thought, \"Hey, I'm gonna have second thoughts.\" When I heard the government's arguments again later, I thought, \"Hey, is it right that I start to doubt?\" In any case, as a group, we are going to make up our minds. I would like to mention a few points. For me, the real question remains whether this law is necessary. Does this law offer a proper basis? It is striking that the government has given a very different answer than the initiators. That is also what we shall relate to. I don't know if there's a real or ultimate truth. Whether it is a good instrument is also a very fair question for me. This also has to do with the fact that \"one size fits all\" instruments simply do not work. We're about to find out. The Secretary of State has told us about a number of experiments in Barneveld and in disadvantaged neighbourhoods. I also understand that this is going to be a policy. Will he also promise that that policy is going to be? I have to tell you, I have more faith in that. Then there was the point made by the initiators: if you do not support this, you are actually asking for more mandatory measures. I was a little unhappy when I heard that, because some of the critical remarks made by this Chamber had nothing to do with intentions, not even with politics, but with the law as it stands. I recognize that when it comes to protection, you have micro-effects, but the honest answer is that you also have macro-effects. I'm not gonna be poor with the question of who knows the best statistics. That is not your intention, nor mine, but honesty requires me to say that, when I read the RIVM report, I am not convinced that this law will make a positive contribution at a slightly more macro level. Finally, the fact that covid is part of the national vaccination programme gives us some concern. I'll tell you why. In the contribution to the covid debates, our group has often stressed that we consider communication to be extremely important, because we find the growing social contradictions very unfortunate. We think this is bad for society's \"together.\" We have seen that, despite the fact that the government has recently communicated better on this point, polarisation has increased rather than decreased. That means that, if we have to say honestly that covid is covered, I am not at all satisfied that this overall leads to a higher vaccination rate. I would ask the initiators to reflect on this. Finally, I would like to make the following comment. I have already said to Mr Van Strien that I share the interests of the PVV voters. However, if I look at the adoption of this law... 29% of the PVV voters are unvaccinated and 85% of the Forum for Democracy voters................................................................................................................................................... Then I wonder: if this law applies to covid, these voters in particular will be disadvantaged. That's something I wouldn't want either."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2022-04-21-tweedekamer-9.u13", "speech text": "Mr President, thank you very much. We're here, even though we could've all been at the Invictus Games. But I hope everyone has had the opportunity to be there for a while, because it really is a fantastic event. I would like to thank the speakers for their comments. I shall of course return to the motions, of which I shall make three and the Secretary of State the other three. I just wanted to say this in response. Everyone has just referred to Ukraine and what we can do as the Netherlands. Some have also said something about the defence budget and support for its increase. I'm grateful for that. I am also pleased that we can continue to help Ukraine, including with heavier military assets, which they themselves have requested in the context of self-defense, to which they have every right, of course. The renewed offensive that we are now seeing developing in the Donbas region underlines, I think, its importance. The cabinet also always stresses in the letters that we always check the effects of this material support on our own readiness, and that we find a good balance in that, that we always get military advice on that and that we consider it acceptable so far. Mr. Chairman. That said, I'm coming up..."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2022-05-11-tweedekamer-12.u10", "speech text": "Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It's a good time. It's always nice when MPs take the initiative to change laws and make society a little bit better. This is an example of that. There's a social discussion about the minimum wage. The PvdA believes that this should definitely go up to \u20ac14 and beyond. Of course, that is not what this proposal is about. But this is happening here: for some groups that are actually still at the minimum wage, 10% increase per month will be the result. Enforcement is also improving. That really makes society a lot better and fairer. This is due to the tiresome work of support, Mrs Hellevoort and Mr Wolters; congratulations for that. Of course, congratulations also to colleagues, but also to their predecessors. I do not want to leave Gijs van Dijk unnamed. They've done a lot of work for that. I would like to congratulate you on that. Mr President, you expect critical notes from me. I have a lot of them. But I'm just really excited that this seems to end well. Although we must also take the First Chamber very seriously as part of the States General. So they're not here yet, but I wish you luck in the defense there. Thank you, Mr. Chairman."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2022-05-12-tweedekamer-3.u295", "speech text": "Oh, yeah. Technically it is possible and there is no obstacle. The CBS knows. At the CBS they have this data and there they know the persons themselves by name and by name. However, the CBS cannot give me that data. Then, with Aleid Wolfsen, I searched for: how? Then how am I gonna find out? In addition, I was told about a technique that I don't control. They say we can do it, we work this out and we test this one more time. In two or three weeks, I want to come to the Chamber with this and I want to show you how we can get that data. Then I can actively approach the people. Then I also have to look for a form where I don't brusque these people because they suddenly get a letter from the government, after which they start thinking: oh, we have to get into the defense, because we don't trust that government. So I'm gonna have to take care of that, too."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2022-05-17-tweedekamer-22.u40", "speech text": "I've been working with \"loose tickets\" my whole life, as you call them, Mr. Chairman. I said something about the speed of the tire during the interruption. I am very grateful to Mrs Vestering for the fact that a genuine expert veterinarian, who has also worked for the NVWA, has just confirmed that the tyre speed has to be reduced. We'll just start with that. Let that be said. I will be happy to sign and support any motion on this subject. That's what I've done with the Animal Party before. This is yet another debate on the disgusting bastards with defenseless animals in our slaughterhouses. We have also requested a debate on this ourselves. Our request has been merged with that of Mr Wassenberg, who was with it before. Thank you to my colleague, who unfortunately is not here at the moment. The continuous images of animals for slaughter that are tortured, cooked alive or ripped open just before their death are on everyone's retina. Everyone thinks it's disgusting. I've never met anyone who doesn't think that's disgusting. People just lie awake from that. It is also disrespectful to the farmers, who are still trying to treat the animals somewhat well. But if they get into the last few meters of their lives, they'll just be tortured. That is also very disrespectful to our farmers. Even sober, hard abattoir workers reported to me in the last few years. NVWA veterinarians are also there; they were received by the former Minister of LNV and by me. They were severely intimidated and abused. We have received one lady who has really almost died. We received her separately. It was very sad. That woman has been traumatized for her life. I'm still with her and her health in mind. I hope she's okay. But actually, little or nothing has happened. Just before this debate we received a letter from the meat sector stating how well it would all go. But I'm not the king, am I? I'm not handing out medals here. The point is that we're here to deal with assholes. And that's what we're gonna do together, as Mrs Beckerman said. I feel there's gonna be a lot of cooperation. Mr. Van Campen would even go with me on a job visit. He did withdraw afterwards, but at least the beginning was there, so that was very nice. Hey, he's gonna sit. Funny. I hear him saying it's gonna cost him an interruption. I'm going to list a few points. We don't discuss awards here. I'm going to list a few points we'd like to make. I've got the motions ready for that, too. Some things I've been asking for since 2006 and some things since 2011. We want high fines, much higher fines, in relation to the crime. But those fines should not be for the vets, as is happening now. Last week another vet got a high fine, while the best man didn't even get a warning and actually didn't know he'd done anything wrong. But he did get a fine of $5,000. No, the bastards need to be dealt with: a prison sentence, a professional ban to never work in a slaughterhouse again, and also a life-long ban on the keeping of animals for recidivists at slaughterhouses. Because when you deal with animals like that, you don't get along well with your animals at home either, so end of practice. We also want permanent camera surveillance. Actually, that's already been agreed. That camera surveillance must be in addition to physical checks, premortem and postmortem. We also want the animal police and NVWA to be able to watch permanently. That is very easy to do today."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2022-05-18-tweedekamer-6.u22", "speech text": "Mr. Chairman. Thank you very much to the authors, Mrs Bromet and Mr De Groot, and to all the supporters. Thanks also to our advisor, the Minister. Certainly during the first term of the Chamber it was a lively debate. I'm looking back on a nice debate. It also has a bit to do with it that it is not clear in advance what the majority in this house looks like. That, of course, makes every debate in this house really interesting: if there is to be a fight for a majority. That is also a bridge to my amendment. I have just tabled an amendment which I had already announced in the first time. Heard the response, I would table an amendment. It goes one step further, I say to reassure Mrs Bromet, then simply remove the secure seats from the daily administration. It also deals with the second point in my speech, namely the fixed division between the secure seats of two-two-two. Both aspects of the amendment are exactly in line with the opinion of the 2015 Water Advisory Committee, which was not followed up at the time. Mr. Chairman. I understand and realize that this amendment is quite a grotesque change in the present initiative proposal. I have, of course, considered how to do this differently, given this debate. A motion doesn't change a law in the end. All things considered, I thought I would have to table an amendment. I hope that the proposers will not cause me any trouble. At least, maybe only today, but not tomorrow. That's just like context and defense. The substance of the amendment is perfectly consistent with what I argued in the first term. In that sense, I refer back to the first term. In my view, it is a crystal clear amendment and a crystal clear explanatory statement. Let it speak for itself. I hope I can organize a majority for it."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2022-05-19-tweedekamer-3.u11", "speech text": "Mr President, thank you. A number of colleagues have already referred to it in the debate on the matter: this Prime Minister has resigned because of the surcharge scandal. One of the promises made in the letter of resignation was: We're going to do it differently. Public information systems need to be improved. It was also said that we must ensure that what happened there can never again prevent the Chamber from doing its job and that journalists can do their job. Unfortunately, today we have to say again that nothing has come of this promise, because today we are not talking about a jolly Prime Minister, in the sense of: what a special man, with his old car or his old phone. This is about a pattern. That's the pattern in which memos on dividend taxation wouldn't exist. Guess what? They were there, but \"we called it \"notes.\" It's the pattern in which the receipt of the Bitch Deal was lost, but it turned out to be there. It is the pattern of no minutes of discussions about the surcharge scandal, the pattern of no memories of Hawija and of the bombing there, no active memories of Pieter Omtzitzit and the comments made about \"function elsewhere.\" Now we hear the Prime Minister deleted his texts himself. It's a pattern. That is why we are here to have this debate today. We can't do this, and we can't do this. I see a line of defense was rigged yesterday at the General Affairs Department. The Prime Minister is now hiding behind the document \"Keeping chat messages\" of the government. He says, \"Look, I don't have to keep it, because my officials have to keep it.\" Examples are given for this. Here too, there is only half the truth, because I say to the Prime Minister that under this directive it is true that he, if his officials also have messages, does not have to keep them on his own phone. Then you may wonder if it's wise to erase them, but he's right. That's not what the discussion is about. There is another very important point that is being made. If there is any contact with third parties, I should like to mention just one: for example, the ceo of Unilever or the mayor of the capital city, it is the responsibility of the Prime Minister and not of his officials to keep such messages. This can be done in different ways, such as screenshots, export or archive mobile. In all the Wob requests we read back yesterday, I don't see anything in these contacts with third parties. That's why I have the following questions. How often has it happened that messages from third parties and messages between two directors have been forwarded to the Ministry of General Affairs? If the Prime Minister says that he has more or less complied with the Directive on the retention of chat messages, how has he done so? Have screenshots been saved, mobile archived, and how much has been forwarded? How many messages does the Prime Minister actually receive and send when he texts and how many are archived in total? The letter also talks very handy about the provider. It is said that the telephone provider cannot retrieve the text messages. That's right. We'll never know what was erased on such a Nokia again; you'll never find out. But the metadata are available: to which phone numbers has been texted at what times? How many messages have been sent and how many have been received, at least in the last three months? I am not asking for that to be sent to the House of Representatives as a whole. I don't think that's relevant. What I do find relevant is the answer to the question of how many texts this Prime Minister sends. How many are he receiving and how many are archived, especially when it comes to contacts with third parties, with captains or industry and other directors in the country and in the cabinet? Mr. Chairman. I'll come to a conclusion. We're not standing here because of one deleted text. We are standing here, as I said, because of a pattern and because we promised each other in the debate on 1 April: we are going to do things differently; we want an open and transparent government in which all the decisions that are taken can be controlled. This is not the case at the moment by the active action of this Prime Minister."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2022-05-19-tweedekamer-3.u13", "speech text": "Mr President, thank you. Thank you also to my fellow Members for changing the order on the list of speakers, because we are going to have the very important debate in which we must do justice to all the parents and children who are victims of the government's actions, which this Prime Minister has been leading for 11 years. Mr. Chairman. How do you guard your own boundaries? And what happens if you stretch those boundaries too often and let others go over them? I was at a birthday party last week with my youngest daughter. You know how it is. You see all these kids running together and it seems very chaotic, but there's still a line in it. When one of the bigger kids in the game didn't follow the rules, actually just played mean, that was the reason for some kids to ring the bell. And how did they do that? They all shouted at once: stop, stop! And that wasn't easy. For declaring boundaries and standing up for yourself is not easy, certainly not against a commoner who is greater and has a lot of power. But if you don't guard those boundaries, it could have very bad consequences, both for the perpetrator and for the victim. Mr. Chairman. This is the umpteenth time Rutte has crossed those borders, the limits of the parliamentary rule of law. Rutte knew Zijlstra was lying and he withheld this information. He said, \"I don't have an active memory of it.\" This Prime Minister knew there were memos about the dividend tax, and then he said, \"I have no memory of it.\" This Prime Minister lied about \"Pieter Ommzigt, function elsewhere.\" And then he said, \"I remembered it wrong.\" Mr. Chairman. People who have been in power for years, like Mark Rutte, have little insight into their own behavior. They're not always aware that they're crossing borders. That is why it is crucial that we, as a parliament, as a supervisory body, help them to do so. We already see the consequences if we don't. We saw that Hugo de Jonge, who had misinformed the Chamber, maintained in the debate that he was not. In fact, he also used a private address when he wasn't supposed to. He also insisted that all that was within the law. But what Rutte has been doing for years, that's the norm. And if we allow that standard, if we here as a Chamber allow the Cabinet to determine what information is stored and what information is shared with that Chamber, then we simply cannot do our job. That does something to you inside. I saw the best example at Gert-Jan Segers, April 1st last year. He literally said, \"Something snaps.\" If you go on too long with someone else who crosses the line, something snaps, like you feel something breaking. Because Segers often operates politically on the basis of principles, at least that is what he often suggests, he said after another lie: there is a way of dealing with the truth that is problematic for us; there must be an end to that culture, because this is detrimental to our political culture. D66 leader Kaag had the same thing. She said, \"This is where we part ways.\" Unfortunately that only lasted a second or ten, while the rest of the Netherlands had the idea that she really wanted to stick to that. Mr. Chairman. We always get the same line of defense. Mr Klaver has already spoken about this. In the letter, the Prime Minister writes that there are no substantive points of departure for a selection. That is the framework for employees, but not for prime ministers. He will say: I may have gone too far, but I have gone too far. No one gets that. Mr. Chairman. Do we continue to regard this Prime Minister as an incident outside the parliamentary rule of law? Or are we gonna climb up here and take our part back? Because it is detrimental to our political culture. Gert-Jan Segers said that last year. Are we standing with a straight back for all those Dutch people who voted for us? For it is time that we set limits and say to this Prime Minister: stop, stop!"}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2022-05-19-tweedekamer-3.u34", "speech text": "I can't get an answer to my question. Mr Bontenbal tells us something else. I understand that line of defense. I'm fine with all of that. I have a very simple question. He himself states that the Prime Minister is responsible for ensuring that everything is recorded in an orderly manner and that it is searchable. That is because it is our job, including Mr Bontenbal's, to monitor this. That is because journalists have access to and can check what is happening there. It's quite a thing the Prime Minister can do on behalf of the people."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2022-05-19-tweedekamer-3.u136", "speech text": "This is exactly what I'm talking about. This is exactly the pattern of the VVD: just keep defending this prime minister. I asked a very simple question. You say that the Prime Minister has complied with this manual. I ask you, where does it say you can quote text messages to officials? I'll give you the answer: nowhere. You know that well, even if you don't answer that. Your line of defense is: yes, but it doesn't say it shouldn't. So this is exactly how the VVD wants to deal with rules. As long as it's not there, as long as it's not exactly described, we'll use all the space there is with all the consequences of that. We do not know exactly what happened with the decision-making around Hawija. We don't know exactly how it went with Bitch's receipts. The most important thing: the surcharge scandal that has arisen and over which the previous cabinet has fallen, we are not going to avoid again because there is simply a lack of transparency. And you keep defending it."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2022-05-31-eerstekamer-12.u341", "speech text": "I will answer the questions that have been asked about the vision of aviation. This concerns both network quality and sustainability. Finally, I would like to answer a few questions about the current situation at Schiphol. Mr Vendrik, Mr Ester and Mr Crone asked the question about the scenarios for the future of KLM and of aviation, in financial and social terms, but also within the vision of aviation. A number of policy proposals have already been laid down in recent years. Firstly, the Aviation Note was published in 2020. This Aviation Paper outlines aviation policy until 2050, which is clear. The previous cabinet has stated that it is not a question of \"growth\" or \"shrink\" but of guaranteeing the quality of public interests. That's the lead. The coalition agreement that this cabinet received in January also clearly sets ambitions for these frameworks in terms of sustainability and viability, but also in terms of network quality. We've got the Aeronautics Note. This will be further developed in the context of the implementation agenda. That will be a tighter story, given the provisions of the new coalition agreement in which the cabinet I am planning to implement in 2022 to clarify what we call \"security and perspective for aviation'. Security and perspective for the quality of the environment as well as for the interests of the residents, the environment and the nuisance they face. And there is also the importance of having good connections, good network quality, with abroad. This is what the cabinet is shaping this year. It's not gonna be New Year's Eve. In the course of the coming months, the cabinet will decide on this. We are also working on the framework for network quality for the implementation of this network quality. This is also based on the quality of the connections for our country and not on quantity. So that's all that's ever better. The sustainability and quality of life frameworks have also been defined in part and are further defined. In the end, it is up to the aviation sector to operate within these frameworks with a business model that can be profitable. These are many things that apply primarily to airports, but also, of course, to airlines. Mr Crone asked about this framework for network quality and whether Schiphol and KLM would cooperate. We want to take that thoroughly and properly. The framework is now being prepared. That's going to the Chamber this year. We are now in the first phase of development, to give it a good, solid foundation. We do that internally within the government. We are now about at the stage in which we also start the consultation of the corresponding stakeholders, including of course Schiphol and KLM. Eventually, as a government, we make the decisions. Minister Kaag said a moment ago about the business model, but specifically about what that will mean for KLM in the future in the context of the Aviation Note. Mr Crone asked for this: a new business model that is economically profitable and meets environmental requirements. First, the finding that the review of KLM's business model is not part of the aid package agreed in 2020. However, the conditions set out in the support package aim to structurally improve the competitiveness of KLM, including the conditions of network quality, viability and sustainability. Our government guidance on that business model is, as it were, indirectly through the frameworks we set out through the Aviation Note and the concrete measures that are still in line with the coalition agreement. The business model itself is therefore primarily KLM's. But then it comes: in the current and future circumstances KLM can be expected to review its business model in accordance with current circumstances and expectations, such as the environment and climate, where necessary, and adjust its strategy. In the previous report, the state agent made a comment on this: I want to look more closely at how KLM is shaping its business model, its earning model, towards the future. He suggested, among other things, that KLM was in financial trouble in 2020, just like all airlines in the world, because of the consequences of the pandemic, but that at the same time you can learn how to give a little more flexibility to your future earning model. I will not immediately say that you will be able to withstand such a pandemic, but you can think better about the flexibility that goes with it in your business model. The same applies to the flexibility in recovery after the corona pandemic, the question of whether you can have more flexibility in the expectations of the business segment versus other categories of travelers, and of course the flexibility to move constantly and preferably lead the way in terms of the sustainability of aviation. I was talking about network quality, but also about that other aspect of sustainability, the quality of the environment and the reduction of aviation nuisance. Several members of your Chamber, Mr Vendrik, Mrs Prast, Mr Crone, asked how the intentions of Air France-KLM and KLM themselves fit in with the wider need for sustainability and how do we see this in relation to climate change? As mentioned above, we not only want to maintain a good connection, a good network quality at Schiphol Airport, where KLM is of course an important player as the largest user of Schiphol Airport. Through the stock issue we contribute to this through the maintenance of a good information position, but that is sufficiently explained. At the same time, we think it is important that attention should be paid to reducing the negative effects of aviation on people, the environment and nature. As a cabinet, therefore, we are also committed to making the entire aviation sector more sustainable. This will ultimately mean more and more for the largest airline operating in the Netherlands now and in the future. Mrs. Prast already referred to the route there. Then why do you want that through shareholdership if there are other instruments for it? Of course, she's right about that. There are many other instruments. I'll get right on that. In the end, however, it is also important that we not only want the instruments. Of course, we also want the largest airline in the Netherlands to take up its responsibility to proactively implement it in a leading role as much as possible and as soon as possible. Then there is the whole policy on sustainability. The 2019 Climate Agreement contains only a few rules on aviation. The starting point of the Climate Agreement and of all the parties with whom we agreed as a cabinet in 2019 is that the sustainability of aviation and the reduction of CO2 emissions requires an international approach. This approach is international, because aviation is global. It is therefore preferable to do so through global agreements, for example in the context of ICAO, the international aviation organisation. At the same time, in the Netherlands too, the ambition was to see if we could go a step further. Internationally, I referred to ICAO, but of course the European Union makes a number of proposals in the Fit-for-55 programme to reduce CO2 emissions from aviation. These months are also being discussed in the European Union on the incorporation of renewable fuels, but also, for example, on the phasing-out of free allowances in the ETS system, which should include aviation within the ETS in the foreseeable future. This is a very good incentive to ensure that the sector is challenged to the maximum to reduce CO2 emissions. When the Climate Agreement was agreed, there was also national initiative for the Sustainable Aviation Table. That has also led to an agreement. If you take that agreement from 2019, you can see that this agreement is full of ambitions and that almost all the parties involved in aviation in the Netherlands participated in it. In the end, however, it is a roadmap of how the Netherlands can take a leading role in this. For example, the first concrete objective is to integrate 14% of renewable fuels by 2030. Meanwhile, it is also a whole road map of how the aviation sector as a whole in the Netherlands wants to make an effort to get there, knowing that this is, of course, one of the biggest and perhaps most complex transitions in that whole climate issue. There's no such thing as a big jet on hydrogen engines. However, there is a lot of work being done to develop it. So this is not a development that you get introduced from one day to the next. In fact, we have indicated that we want to have a leading position as the Netherlands, but we have very few international control options. If you want to remove a lock for the reason that it is not sustainable, then there is another airline. We don't have any control tools to say that someone else can't have that lock. Nevertheless, from that national agreement of the Sustainable Aviation Table, we have a number of additional national instruments. We have also included these instruments in the coalition agreement. Not only do we have a higher incorporation target than the European Union imagines, but we also intend to set a CO2 ceiling for airports. This cabinet has also taken the initiative for additional noise-insulating measures in homes around Schiphol and for further anti-inhibiting measures. This cabinet also announced its intention to increase the flight tax. It is also committed to a kerosene load in Europe. These are all matters that we have first of all come up with nationally. The state aid conditions package for KLM in 2020 may also be good to remember. That package is also, in fact, a kind of defense brought about by the government. In 2020, the fear was that if your national airline is in such financial difficulties, the commitment to remain part of the national sustainability agenda will go down before you know it. This was therefore also reason to include KLM's commitment to those sustainability conditions, including the incorporation of 14% renewable fuel by 2020. The state agent has pointed out that the KLM has committed itself to the 2030 targets, but that, if one wants to see if KLM is really on the right track, there should also be some sort of growth plan, on the basis of which it becomes clear what KLM expects to have achieved at a number of moments between now and 2030. That's what he reported in the report early this year. That is why Mrs Kaag and I had reason to discuss this with the supervisory board and with the KLM board. We said, \"Give us that plan.\" That wasn't right, but at the same time we also discussed that at the beginning of this year with the board of Air France-KLM, i.e. at holding level, in Paris. I think this is a very concrete example in which your shareholdership also emerges. In the recent consultations Mrs Kaag referred to this shortly before the announcement of the issue, we had discussions on behalf of the Dutch State with the board in Paris. It was also said that the importance and need of a good monitoring plan were seen. At that time, there was also the undertaking from the holding company to ensure that such a monitoring plan from KLM would be drawn up in the foreseeable future. I also think that this is a very concrete example of the operation of the shareholdership, also as a second shareholder. The same applies to the fleet renewal that Mrs Kaag mentioned. At the beginning of this year KLM announced a large-scale fleet renewal, with the Boeing 737 coming out and the much more economical and quiet Airbus 320 coming in. That is also one of the subjects that we discussed directly at the level with the board in Paris, the CEO there, and also with the Dutch board member, who has also worked for this. Those were the comments on sustainability. It is true that we can enforce everything through laws and regulations, although sometimes things are slow and the ambitions of the Netherlands often extend beyond, for example, what is now on a number of topics in Fit for 55. Do you also want to make sure that these conditions, once they are there, are quickly arrested by the Dutch airline, then it will help to sit at KLM's table in all possible ways."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2022-06-02-tweedekamer-18.u301", "speech text": "Mr President, I think it is a good discussion. The essence of this afternoon also comes down to this. Of course, I have to advise my group and I read the motion in such a way that what the service does, the NCTV does not. You said it yourself, Minister. That self-defense investigation isn't intelligence. So what the services do, the NCTV doesn't. We all agree on that. Now we are talking about open sources all the time and whether or not they are allowed to enter the analysis branch of the NCTV, but nowhere in the motion is there anything about open sources. I find that very complicated for both of us, both the petitioner and the minister, because we are talking about something that is not in that motion at all. When I read that motion myself, I think: yes, what the intelligence services do, the NCTV does not. Yes, please! So I find it complicated."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2022-06-07-eerstekamer-6.u155", "speech text": "In the first place, I fully endorse what the Minister says about the complexity and complexity of the situation we are in. It is also right to say that Ukraine has the right to self-defense and that Ukraine is supported in doing so. In addition, the war, as I argued this morning, has a far greater impact. We are talking, for example, about a possible famine, which, as a result of this war, is being intensified in parts of the world. In that sense, we are also party to it. So the question is: how can we talk to Ukraine? I understand that the Minister is constantly doing so in order to clarify the moment when they are ready to enter the conversation?"}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2022-06-09-tweedekamer-5.u13", "speech text": "Mr President, you probably said that because you expect interruptions from me. We're gonna see. Mr. Chairman. Last year, I held my maiden speech in this debate on accountability. I started my contribution with a reminder of a map that hung over the blackboard in my childhood: a vast and reddish country, the Soviet Union. It was an optimistic story, in which I described that free democracies will always eventually overcome and lead to the best outcomes: more prosperity, more happiness for very normal people. It was also a story with concern about a new red danger, about a possible renewed struggle for democracy and for freedom. Who could have thought last year that a criminal in the Kremlin looked at that same map at that time and from misplaced nostalgia, delusions of grandeur or pure hatred would invade a neighbouring country in an attempt to restore that red empire? It is of unprecedented brutality and perhaps also significant for a decade characterized by crises and uncertainty. For example, a global financial crisis already led to a debt crisis in Europe with derailed public finances. Barely obtained from this major economic setback, a global pandemic once again led to an economic blow with once again a huge impact on public finances across Europe. And with that Russian war in Ukraine, we will have another economic thump. People are gonna feel this in their wallet right away. This war also presents us with new geopolitical issues which also call for large investments. Just think about the defense and our energy supply. In this period of uncertainty and crisis and the need for large investments, it is attractive to abandon budgetary discipline, to make more flexible interpretations of agreements we have made with each other. We see it in Europe and we also see it in the Netherlands. I'm really worried about this. We must return to a sound budgetary process with clear budgetary anchors and compliance with agreements we have made with each other. This is at the heart of my speech. I'll start with Europe. The European fiscal rules of the European Stability and Growth Pact have been suspended again in the past year. This suspension is now even being extended for another year. When the reform of the Pact was discussed in the past year, the focus was on easing, while debt continued to rise. At the same time, the European Central Bank has gone too far in buying up many of these debts. This allowed countries to postpone necessary reforms once again and to increase debt further. Over the past year, the ECB's balance sheet has grown to nearly 9,000 billion in purchased debts. That is more than 80% of the euro area economy. This can't go on. At least, you'd think so. To my surprise, I read in the Financial Times a plan for a new buy-back programme of the ECB to prevent interest rate differentials within the euro area from increasing too much. And that in a time of rising inflation. This cannot be done and we must return to sound financial policies in the Netherlands and in Europe. The House will soon be debating the future of the euro area. It is good that colleagues have requested a debate on this issue. I would ask the Minister of Finance to send a letter before this debate containing a cabinet position on the ECB's buy-back programme. How can we restore financial discipline in Europe? What is the government's commitment in Europe to this? This requires a versatile approach. As the ECB continues to increase its mandate, the importance of sound fiscal policies in Europe is also weakening, and problems continue to accumulate. I would like a commitment on this point. Mr. Chairman. I come to the heart of this debate: a sound budgetary policy in the Netherlands. I started my contribution with a reference to my maiden speech last year. At that time it was also about the importance of good accountability. There is a need for a strong government. That also calls for proper control of that government. But then that control must be possible. In this context, we have discussed in detail Article 2.27 of the Compatibility Act. I can imagine that not everyone who is looking now knows that article, but the bottom line is that a cabinet can only spend money with the permission of the House of Representatives, with one exception. On the basis of Article 2.27, the cabinet can also spend money without the consent of the parliament if it considers it to be in the interests of the Empire. It's a very open article. Last year the General Court pointed out that it was too often used. The room found this, too. I then tabled a motion to tighten up this article. That motion has been accepted by the House of Commons. But I am very disappointed at the outcome of the motion. The only thing the previous cabinet has done is to create an A4 with a decision-making tree for officials, so that it is clear to officials when they can make use of Article 2.27. In fact, there is only one question: is there sufficient time for parliamentary authorisation? If no, use Article 2.27. It's in the A4's. Mr. Chairman. This can't be happening. I should try this at home. I want a new car tomorrow. You know what, I'm gonna buy it right away and at home I'm gonna say, \"Sorry, honey, there wasn't time for familial authorization.\" I'm afraid I'll be sleeping in that car from now on. Article 2.27 was invoked 40 times in 2020 and reached 59 times in 2021. This would mean that the importance of the Empire was at stake five times a month. And the counter goes on. The exception article has been used 24 times this year. When you look at the motivation in the incidental supplementary budgets of this exceptional article I've been studying them all over the past few weeks, you're actually reading something interesting. Then you see that over time a different argument is increasingly being used, namely that there is an urgent nature of the payments. The policy must be implemented quickly. But that's not what Article 2.27 is about at all. It is not about speed of policy but about whether the importance of the Empire is at stake, which means that speed is necessary. In a crisis situation, of course, it may be true, but Article 2.27 is also increasingly being used outside crisis situations. If we look at 2022 alone, this year, we see expenditure related to ventilation measures in school buildings, a rolling lease at Foreign Affairs or a European hydrogen project. That will all be very good spending, but they are no reason to put Parliament out of play. In addition, Article 2.27 states that the States General should have been informed, which led to the Prime Minister's remark last year that the cabinet might have had to put a stamp on a note more often. Technically, he was right, but that was obviously not in the spirit of the law. And right here, it's pinching. When it comes to sound fiscal policies, the Compatibility Act now leaves too much room for interpretation to the cabinet. It needs framing. Or, more flatterly, we want our ATM card back. I therefore propose that Article 2.27 be supplemented by the condition that the States-General should not only be informed, but that the States-General should also be informed. This puts the Chamber in a position to judge whether the importance of the Empire is actually at stake and it also forces the Chamber to take up a position. Because in all honesty and that is what I am responsible for, we have not asked for any additional supplementary budgets on this point, of course. I will table a motion for a resolution on this point in my second term. In addition, I will take the initiative with Mr Sneller, as chairman of the Committee on National Expenditure, to draw up a protocol on how we wish to be informed, also taking into account a crisis situation in which we must act quickly, because that is, of course, ultimately for the Chamber."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2022-06-09-tweedekamer-8.u230", "speech text": "I still have a question about the funds. I will not ask what the Minister is going to say next week, but I would like to go back to the Growth Fund. That too was not a very nice procedure. It came all of a sudden. Things have already been set in motion. In the end, in constructive negotiations, we had to force a separate institutional law. This institutional law has been introduced and then it is decided very quickly to pull out an important part of the Growth Fund. My question is, in fact, the following. The defense was all the time: you set something apart; you don't touch it, because you have a purpose for it. This objective will be secured for a multiannual period with a certain amount. But in practical terms, I see that Cabinets, the previous and this, do not hesitate to do all kinds of intervention in the meantime. And that undermines trust in fund formation. I would like to hear the Minister's reflection on that."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2022-06-14-eerstekamer-11.u3", "speech text": "Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you very much for the opportunity to speak in your Chamber today. In the process of an initiative law, the time of the examination in the First Chamber, its defense, is always the most important moment. That is all the more true because it is the first time for me and for Mrs Ellemeet that we can defend an initiative law in your midst. Mrs Kuik has done this a number of times before. Thank you for that. Mr. Chairman. At the same time, it has been four decades since there was a major material change to the Law of Abruption pregnancy here. 38 years ago, the Law on Abrupt Pregnancy came into force and it required a lot of dialogue at the time. That was also the case before that law came into being in 1981. I looked back at exactly how that debate went at the time, on 28 April 1981. It was a special debate, because there were some famous senators such as Hedy d'Ancona of the Labour Party, Boy Trip, the former PPR Minister, Jan van der Jagt, the GPV group chairman who sat here for almost fifteen years and was always adorned with a bow tie, and Jan Glastra van Loon. In that debate, Mrs Leyten-De Wijkerslooth of the CDA spoke out her maiden speech, in which she pointed out that that law had a turbulent history, also because of the fact that there had been six previous laws of initiative that had been stranded, mostly in the Lower House and once in the Upper Chamber. I quote her: 'My group also realises that it too has to assess the draft law before us in the light of what has already been said and written, also on the other side of the Binnenhof, and is aware of all the efforts already made to settle the abortion problem, but which have been broken in the Lower Chamber or in the First Chamber.' At the time, there was also a wide-ranging debate on the mandatory period of reflection. PSP Senator Joop Vogt was critical. Compared to the practice now established, however, we are clearly declining qualitatively, he said. The five-day reflection period can in some cases be very burdensome, discriminatory for women, or at least seen by a very large number of women. At the time, the law was passed in your Chamber with 38 votes in favour and 37 votes against. Today, we are happy to discuss this law with your Chamber and the mandatory period of reflection. On this side, I would also like to wish Mrs Gerkens and our co-initiator both the best of luck to Mr Van Wijngaard and to thank all the spokesmen for their questions and the attention they have given to the legislative proposal, including in the written round. We will, of course, do our best to answer all the questions as best we can. There are three of us here without Mr Van Wijngaarden. We will all take part in the answer, so let me start by giving you the railway book. Mrs Ellemeet answers all the questions relating to the professionalism of care. In doing so, she also raises the questions as to what exactly this law will mean for the procedure to be followed and for the doctor's job. Mrs Kuik will answer the questions that have been asked about the social basis, the role of the man, who has also been on the subject, the legal aspects. She will include other reflection periods mentioned in the debate, both in the medical field and in private law, and she will answer the questions about the implementation of the legislative amendment and the evaluation of the law. I begin by answering the questions about the cause and the intended outcome of our proposed legislative amendment, the balance in the law between protecting unborn life and caring for women in an emergency situation, the culture related to aborting pregnancy, and the answer to questions about scientific justification. If we have to say once or twice that another initiator has to answer the question, then excuse in advance. Mr. Chairman. I should like to begin by answering the question on the basis of this initiative. In particular, Mr Van Dijk specifically asked for this in his speech. At the time of entry into force in 1984, to which I referred, the legislator considered that creating the balance between caring for a woman and the protection of unborn life required the mandatory minimum period of five days of reflection. These five days would ensure that the woman would make an informed choice. In fact, it is implied that without those five days the choice would not be careful or considered in sufficient cases. This assumption appears to be incorrect, as it has repeatedly proved since the adoption of the law 38 years ago that a fixed mandatory period of at least five days is not necessary to make an informed choice. That is what the 2005 and 2020 legal assessments show, because they both advise to abolish that fixed period of reflection. Mr De Vries of the Otten Group pointed out in his speech that in 2012 the World Health Organisation had the same opinion to all countries with a mandatory period of reflection, namely to remove this period of reflection. Therefore, the mandatory period of reflection does not achieve the intended objective. In addition, we see that it does lead to adverse effects. The mandatory period of reflection causes negative effects on the emotional well-being of women and causes psychological complaints. It also mentioned something that could not be foreseen in 1984. Due to the mandatory period of reflection, there are also limits at stake, which sometimes require a more severe procedure in order to break down pregnancy. As a result, women are restricted in their treatment options. This in turn leads to a greater risk of complications and therefore less good care for women. On the other hand, professional assistance and good support for women in need do contribute to making an informed choice. Therefore, the initiators aim to change the fixed period of reflection to the flexible period of reflection. It recognizes that every situation is different. We believe this contributes to tailor-made care. The woman determines in conversation and with the help of doctors how much time she needs to reach a decision. With this change of law, there is therefore plenty of room for a shorter or longer reflection period. The period of reflection therefore remains, albeit not legally, five days. That is the essence of what we are arguing. Mr Van Gurp asked whether we had also considered removing the period of reflection entirely from the law. We have tried to stay very close to the evaluations and, moreover, to what the Council of State recommended. For example, the first review of the law states that there should be such a reflection period as is necessary in order to reach an informed decision in the circumstances. The evaluations show that this is also the wish of the professional field. We therefore believe that a flexible period of reflection is more appropriate than a complete abolition of that period of reflection. Mr. Chairman. Questions have been asked about what this says about our culture. For example, Mr Van Dijk said that this proposal would facilitate the termination of pregnancy. They asked what impact this has on culture. This is more of a normalization of pregnancy termination, if I may paraphrase him like that. We like to give that reflection. The proposers consider that a pregnancy break-up cannot be seen as an isolated element, because it concerns the whole of good sexual and reproductive health care. Sexual education and accessible contraception together contribute to preventing unwanted pregnancy. That is also an important consideration which Mrs Vos and Mr Dittrich pointed out. Looking at the Netherlands, we see that the figures for pregnancy breaks have been stable for years. Compared to countries with comparable levels of registration, these figures are relatively low. In this respect, therefore, we do not believe that there is a trend towards normalization of pregnancy break-up. In fact, in this respect, we agree with what Mr Kox said. There still seems to be a taboo in the Netherlands to talk about a situation in which a woman has had to abort pregnancy. Rather, we believe that it will benefit the provision of care if there is no longer a taboo and if there is more open discussion about it. But the fact that there is a taboo does say something about the fact that there has been no standardisation in our view. Mr Van Gurp asked whether the initiators considered that termination of pregnancy should be part of criminal law. We have, of course, talked about this. We note that this issue is of a very different order from the law as we have now presented it. The idea of putting the legislation on abortion into a completely different legal framework is, of course, something other than the substantive change that we are proposing today. We defend the law here on behalf of the House of Representatives. So, in that sense, I can imagine that the subject will certainly come back, but what we personally consider to be a little less important today. What we are saying is part of the reflection, I say to Mr Van Dijk, is the following. It is wrongly said that converting a mandatory period of reflection into a flexible period of reflection leads to the idea that many thresholds are being removed and that the termination of pregnancy becomes much easier. We have the idea that the qualitative guarantees, as they are listed in Article 5 of the law and have all been incorporated in almost 200 pages of guidelines of the Dutch Association for Obstetrie and Gynaecology and the Dutch Society of Abortion Doctors, aim for a very large part to ensure that there is a careful consideration on the basis of the decision to break down pregnancy. That's a very difficult decision. The compulsory period of reflection also has a very little influence on the decision, which is why we do not think it will remove the threshold, but will improve care."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2022-06-15-tweedekamer-8.u223", "speech text": "Agreed. But a letter has already been promised by the cabinet in the debate with the financial spokesmen. Let me take a look at your colleague, Mr Van der Lee. That letter's already in the making. I can't tell if it's there tomorrow. We want, of course, to take the latest developments with us. But it's already been promised. Mr Dassen asked about the green golden rule. What are we doing to maintain forward-looking investment in these times? Mr Dassen may remember our letter with our own commitment through the non-paper of the Stability and Growth Pact. That letter contains a paragraph on possible funds or the green golden rules. A defense rule comes up as well. There's going to be a social investment rule. In many countries, this debate is going in all directions. So we said in the letter of 4 March that we are reluctant to look at it and want to ensure that countries make choices in a normal, orderly fiscal policy with investments, reforms and credible debt disposal. The sustainability of debt is a major issue. A golden rule, in any form whatsoever........................................................................................................................................................................ In this period that is really undesirable. We also have the 'Fit for 55' programme and REPowerEU. There are many other paths and investment opportunities for many EU countries. Mr Klaver asked how the Netherlands fulfilled its obligations on the African continent. Are we gonna take extra steps over there? That's a very fair question. I believe that you were the only one who spoke to Mrs Simons about the consequences of hunger, displacement and displacement as a result of this crisis. It will be much larger outside Europe. That's already playing. The Minister for Foreign Trade and Development Cooperation is really looking at this. We have increased the coalition agreement. We also do other forms of liquidity support. In addition to the relatively limited ODA instrument, we also use other instruments. By the way, we are under the present cabinet with an increasing ODA performance towards 0.65% in 2026. I'll take your question, including for Mrs., uh, Schreinemacher. Excuse me, I usually call her by her first name. I know she's on top of it. But as with everything else: the means are not infinite. We really need to look at what is possible, also in many other ways, for example through liveraging and the responsibility of the private sector. I don't want to take an advance on that. Mr Segers and Mr Stoffer asked for help for fishermen in view of the high fuel prices. The Minister of LNV is currently looking at the various fisheries regulations. Resources are also available for fishermen due to high fuel prices. 200 million euros are already available from the Brexit Adjustment Reserve to compensate for loss of income due to Brexit. In addition, there is \u20ac45 million for innovation from the North Sea Agreement. It is true: the fishing industry has been affected by the Ukraine crisis. But the cabinet believes that we do not support specific sectors. You have just received the letter from the Minister of EZK. It concerns not only the reduction of the corona aid, but also our attitude towards the continuation of aid. We have explained them. It is time for us, beyond the corona period, to move towards the functioning of the real economy. Mrs Marijnissen and Mr Segers asked for investments in good public transport."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2022-06-28-eerstekamer-3.u58", "speech text": "Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Today we are talking about six legislative proposals that amend the Constitution, at second reading. So we have talked about this before in this Chamber. I can tell you that I am speaking not only on behalf of D66 but also on behalf of the Animal Party. So let's see how that works out. Mr. Chairman. I shall begin with the new Article 17, the right to a fair trial. We believe it is important that the right to a fair trial is now enshrined in the text of the Constitution. One of the reasons is that the law as enshrined in the Constitution is more extensive than the scope of Article 6 of the European Convention on Human Rights, which already applies in the Netherlands. This concerns civil law, administrative law and criminal law, but also, for example, foreign law. In determining the merits of an action brought, one is entitled to a fair trial, but also in determining rights and obligations. This makes the new Constitutional Article 17 important. So that must not be or become a wash nose. During the previous treatment at first instance, the child care allowance scandal has been discussed on several occasions. We all know that public authorities such as the Tax Administration have acted in an incredibly wrong way, and those seeking justice in the Netherlands have suffered. The judges, who are there to speak independently and impartially about disputes, have also attracted the fine. In other debates, this scandal has been dealt with in detail. The various actors have promised to get better. There are many facets to the right to a fair trial. In legal practice, there appear to be bottlenecks which deserve our attention as co-legislator. I would like to ask the government a number of questions about this. They are aspects of, for example, the criminal proceedings that do not normally lead to major headlines, but which are of great importance for people in the Netherlands, for example when they are suing against the government. It is common for the State to make a mistake in a specific case, to conclude a settlement agreement with the deputy and to grant a sum of damages. In future, if the State pays compensation to citizens in the context of the new administrative culture, is the government prepared to waive the clause that the content of the scheme should not be communicated to the outside world? I ask this because people learn from mistakes and how to deal with them. Then society must be made a part of it. So I'd like a response from the Minister. What lawyers regularly encounter is that the Public Prosecutor's Office actively contacts the Dutch media prior to and during a criminal case. That is to inform the public, but sometimes also to influence the public. When it comes to the right to a fair trial, you might ask: why does the D.A. actually do that? How does the Minister view this? Should there not be a code of conduct for the Public Prosecutor, as is the case for lawyers, for example? If the Public Prosecutor thinks he should look up the media, shouldn't it inform the defense in good time in the context of equality of arms? How does the Minister feel about that? If material is seized in criminal proceedings, such as computers, accounting, etc., then the Public Prosecutor's Office may refuse access to the defence and also refuse to provide copies, while this is really relevant for the proper assessment of the case. Is it not important, in the context of a fair trial, for the defence to have the same information as the Public Prosecutor's Office based on in good time? Should the Code of Criminal Procedure be amended for this purpose? So far, the Public Prosecutor's Office has determined what does and what doesn't end up in the criminal record. In other countries, such as the United States, this right is enshrined in the law within the framework of equality of arms. Mr. Chairman. Unfortunately, it appears that the prosecution does not include exculpatory witnesses' statements in the file and does not inform the defence of its existence. The question is therefore: what is the value of a judicial investigation if exculpatory facts are kept out of the file? Because a prosecutor belongs to the judiciary. He serves the truth finding. Attorneys regularly complain that exculpatory evidence is not presented by the police and the Public Prosecutor's Office. How does the Minister respond to that? What can be done about this, do we want to implement the right to a fair trial properly? I would remind you that yesterday there was a big article in the Volkskrant about the Deventer murder case, which also mentioned that certain detectives had not included certain facts about a scent test with dogs in the file and had received a stand for it. This proves that things like this can occur in all kinds of cases. Sometimes it also happens that really incorrect information is recorded in a report, for example that a witness wanted to make a statement or did not mention any fact, while later it turns out that the witness explicitly stated the opposite. Is the Minister prepared to communicate clearly to the Public Prosecutor and the police that this is contrary to the basic rules of truth finding and organising a fair trial? Then something else. The Legal Assistance Board is formally governed by the Ministry of Justice and Security. If someone has to sue against the State, for example the Public Prosecutor's Office, it does not feel right for the Council to decide whether or not someone is eligible for funded legal aid. Is the Minister prepared to examine whether it is possible that, when the government is a trial party, an organisation more remote from the JenV Ministry will consider whether funded legal aid can be allocated? A Dutchman who is arrested abroad for a criminal offence committed abroad is, in principle, not entitled to funded legal assistance under the law, because the Dutch interest would be lacking. But sometimes the witnesses to that foreign case take place in the Netherlands precisely because the witnesses are Dutch and live here. The foreign lawyer of the Dutchman must then employ a Dutch lawyer for legal aid. And that Dutch lawyer sometimes has to spend hours preparing the case and attending witnesses' interviews with the Dutch judge-supervisor in relevant cases. Will the Legal Aid Council continue to say: 'It is a foreign matter, there is a lawyer, the law does not provide for this situation'? But if the Dutch suspect is unable to pay a Dutch lawyer in detention abroad, he will find himself at a huge disadvantage. My question to the Minister is whether, in the context of a fair trial, there should be a hardness clause in the regulation as regards the provision concerning the Dutch interest. Strangely enough, in a case in which the Legal Assistance Council says that the Dutch interest is lacking, the costs of legal aid are reimbursed by Dutch witnesses who in the Netherlands are required to make a statement to the court commissioner in that foreign criminal case. Does it happen more often that the D.A. does reimburse witnesses' legal aid, but not the defendant's? What's that based on? What does the Minister actually think of that? Mr. Chairman. Already in the time of Minister of Foreign Affairs Hans van Mierlo has been agreed with the House of Representatives that every Dutchman who is in pre-trial custody abroad, or is serving his sentence, should be visited periodically by a Dutch embassy employee. The right to a fair trial also extends to Dutch in foreign detention, especially when a request to transfer the execution of the sentence can be made. The Netherlands has a duty of care. This should not become dependent on the media attention that a lawyer in the Netherlands can generate in order to enforce such a visit abroad. My question to the Minister is: are all Dutch prisoners visited in foreign detention, as agreed with Parliament? Are there countries with white spots? Where can this improve? Mr. Chairman. The constitutional right to a fair trial will only come to life if the Dutch State behaves fairly and fairly. It is therefore important to include this right in the Constitution. I therefore hope that legal practice will show that improvements will result from inclusion in the Constitution. I am therefore looking forward with interest to the Minister's reply, although I am aware that the portfolios of her colleagues at the JenV ministry are also affected by this. Mr. Chairman. Then there is the constitutional change on a electoral college elected by non-residents for the election of the First Chamber. I lived abroad for 12 years, in New York and Berlin. When something happened in the Netherlands, people always came after me. This applies to all Dutch people abroad. Then they immediately asked: what is going on in the Netherlands? If you live abroad as a Dutchman, you are, as it were, an ambassador of your own country on an interhuman level. Then it is strange that as a Dutchman from abroad you can participate in the Lower House elections, or in the elections to the European Parliament, but not in the election of the First Chamber, just because you do not live in a Dutch province or in the Caribbean Netherlands. The bill we're discussing today will fix it. Of course, it is important to know what the implementing law will look like and what choices the House of Representatives will make about, for example, the voting value. Can the Dutch be compared abroad with those in a province? How exactly does that work? We believe that this debate should not take place now, but when the implementing law comes our way. The proposal was submitted to the House of Representatives in April, as I recall. It would be very nice if the new system could be applied at the Provincial State elections in March 2023, but it would have to be accepted by the House of Representatives quickly and then discussed here again. Is that feasible in terms of time? How does the Minister view this? Mr. Chairman. Then there is the constitutional change on the inclusion of the general provision in the Constitution. In 2012, the First Chamber adopted the motion of Hans Engels of D66 on that general provision in the Constitution. It expresses the fact that the Netherlands is a democratic constitutional state. We believe it is important that this general provision precedes Article 1 of the Constitution and, as it were, sets out the framework from which the Constitution, a living document, should be read. I ask the Minister what other changes to the Constitution are actually planned for the government. How is the Constitution brought to the attention of education? The Constitution will soon exist for 175 years. What attention is the government going to pay to this? Article 120 of the Constitution states that the courts may not review the laws against the Constitution. The Remkes State Committee proposes constitutional review. The coalition agreement also writes about this. When can we then receive in the First Chamber the main note of the Minister with variants of that constitutional review? It is a subject that the First Chamber is very close to. We would like to discuss this further with the Minister. Mr. Chairman. Finally, the change in the Constitution of the provision on the immunity of letter, telephone and telegraph secrecy. We welcome the fact that the wording in the new text is made technologically neutral, but it remains difficult to find out when citizens are protected against the government on the basis of Article 13 or on the basis of the privacy article 10. That has to do with the content of the messages or the transport of those messages. My final question to the Minister is: can the Minister explain the delineation of these articles for the history of law? 'Cause it's kind of complicated to figure that out. Thank you."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2022-06-30-tweedekamer-5.u39", "speech text": "Mr Van Baarle uses words like \"defense line,\" but I have nothing to defend. This is just the point of view. This is how we look at it. For example, if trafficking in human beings would mainly take place from Germany to the Netherlands, then it is important that someone working at customs should perhaps do an extra check when women of certain ages from Germany cross the border? That's not about women or putting people away, is it? I only agree with you that discriminatory fraud algorithms, for example on the basis of origin, should not thrive within the government. I think we have just mentioned one example from the past. If you were a 60-plus man from Suriname, you'd be pinged up somewhere. That's bullshit. That's racist. The VVD doesn't want that either, but categorically rejecting it doesn't seem like a good idea. We are now, of course, talking a little bit about all kinds of different examples. If you have a concrete example of which you say 'this is not good', 'this was the VVD against' or 'I have a very good motion or a very good proposal', we are happy to look at it. This debate is still a few hours away. However, I believe that we have been on your side enough times when it comes to banning discriminatory algorithms in the government."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2022-06-30-tweedekamer-9.u377", "speech text": "I'd like to put her to the vote on Tuesday, because it's also a speech-out. So that is also important for the Chamber. The importance was in the second operative part. The background to that was that I understood from the police that there have been some problems in the last few days with the supply of defense equipment. If the promise is that it is not, certainly not on Monday, then I am entirely happy and I do not need to vote on that motion now either."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2022-07-05-eerstekamer-3.u102", "speech text": "I've been vaccinated myself. I'm not against vaccinations. I have been informed by doctors and people with knowledge about what is causing the vaccination in particular. Of course, Mr Van der Voort also has a lot of expertise in this area. You have two types of defense: the humoral defence and the cellular defence. The humoral defence disappears quite quickly after vaccination, but the cellular defences by T-cells remain active for quite some time, even after vaccination. The latest scientific evidence shows that people who become ill get less lung covid when they are vaccinated. They're getting less sick too. People who get sick are mainly older people and overweight people over 55 or 60. Certain groups are also less well achieved with vaccination. I'll get to that in a minute. You will not hear us here shouting that vaccination is poison, or all those cries you hear all day long from all those hotshots. Absolutely not. People are not objectively informed about this. They have heard for two years: pricking, pricking, pricking, then we can go anywhere and we can go on vacation again; take a prick and everything is solved. That one-dimensional approach with a kind of wishful thinking has naturally been followed. We must now deal with the consequences. Minister Kuipers in particular has something to do with this. That is why I say: come with a catharsis, a cleansing, or a reflection, as Jeroen Dijsselbloem calls it. Then you can put this behind you and we can move on. But that moment has been skipped, because people do not want to do that political account and are afraid of getting into trouble. Well, then I think, what's more important? The public health of the Netherlands or the political problems of some minister, who has just proved not to have done so well? This will then be established in a survey in two years' time, but that is mustard after the meal. If you believe in vaccinating, you need to be able to explain that to people now. Personally, I think that people who have vaccinated, not all of them are going to get another three, four, five shots. That certainly applies to the younger people, so my feeling is based on what I hear around me. For older people, it's a different story and I would advise you to do so. I'm not a doctor, I don't give medical advice, but of course there's another story. Mr Van der Voort and Mr Kuipers are also very good at advising us on this. We are extremely pleased that at least now there is a good physician at this post. We have always insisted on this, even at the beginning of the crisis."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2022-07-11-eerstekamer-3.u21", "speech text": "Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would also like to thank you for allowing me to speak on this very day. I am also speaking for my grandchildren, Mrs Karimi! For realising the Dutch ambitions in the world we have! The choice of our allies is often decisive for success. Canada is a stable ally with which the Netherlands is doing a lot bilaterally and multilaterally, including in the UN. During President Trump's presidency, it turned out once again how important it was that we also had a partner with common goals on the North American continent. We will also need Canada very much in the future. Mrs Karimi said \"it's not about Canada,\" but of course it's about Canada. We also need Canada in Europe. ==History==After the occupation of Crimea by Russia in 2014, Canada sent 1,000 troops to Latvia. These troops are part of four battalions in Eastern Europe. That alliance with Canada has a long history. There are about 1 million people of Dutch origin living in Canada on a population of 38 million, including a winner of the Elfstedentocht. Our royal family found shelter in the Second War and Canadian soldiers played a very important role in the liberation of the Netherlands between September 1944 and May 1945. Every year remembrance ceremonies are held for the more than 5,000 Canadian soldiers who gave their lives for our freedom and the opportunity to debate here. After the Second World War, Canada has constructively and consistently contributed to a new world order, in which right over power should prevail. Canada was the first to ratify the accession of Finland and Sweden to NATO. Mr President, may I suggest a quote from Prime Minister Trudeau before the interruption. If it's okay with you, I'll do it for the sake of time in English. He said during his visit to the Knight's Room: \"As friends, allies, and partners across the Atlantic, Canada and the Netherlands share a commitment to the brighter tomorrow we want to see, and the progressive values that will get us there. The rule of law. Love reason. The defense of human rights. Multilateral institutions that serve the common good by promoting fairness and equality.' That's Canada, Mr. Chairman. That's Prime Minister Trudeau."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2022-07-11-eerstekamer-3.u116", "speech text": "Mr. Chairman. The First Chamber is not there to establish good, but to prevent evil, says Minister Donker Curtius more than a century and a half ago. Well, I say to all my fellow senators, including my PvdA colleagues, it is not too late to turn back on your steps. A treaty that is bad for people, for the climate and for our democracy, in exchange for not a cup of coffee per month for every EU citizen. That is, at least, if all the uncertain models come out, the economic profit to be expected from CETA. Is such a treaty now in the interest of the citizens of the Netherlands? Among other things, the Consumers' Association knows better. It is strongly opposed, like many other organisations, from trade unions to all environmental organisations to farmers' organisations, who rightly fear that this trade agreement will give them even less perspective. Environmental defense is strongly opposed, as is the FNV, but the PvdA is ahead and does so, as we read in the Volkskrant, for the employees and for the environment. Have all these organizations misunderstood? No, they don't. Mr. Chairman. CETA, which we are talking about today, is called a free trade agreement, but it goes far beyond that. CETA is not called in English for nothing: Wide Economic and Trade Agreement. In fact, \"wide\" is not such a good translation of the English word \"comprehensive\" which means \"multiple.\" And it includes a lot, a lot that affects the interests of all of us. CETA is not just about abolishing import tariffs, which have enough critical questions to ask, but also about removing so-called non-tariff barriers to trade as far as possible and the liberalisation of services and, crucially, investment. In doing so, CETA is a very neo-liberal treaty. I would like to say once again, President-in-Office of the Council, which is based on the philosophy of: the more liberalisation, the more market, the more large jobs for large companies, the better. But, Mr. Chairman, we know better by now. CETA places multinationals above people and does so again by legally anchoring the interests of investors and giving exclusive protection by the so-called Investment Court System, the ICS. This is a parallel legal system created specifically for multinationals. This viphof for multinationals is the worst element of CETA and more than sufficient reason to be very opposed to it. That is why, in the rest of my speech, I shall first address our objections to the ICS in detail. Next, I will deal in turn with the undemocratic way in which CETA harmonises laws and regulations and how CETA is committed to undesirable deregulation and liberalisation. Finally, I will mention how bad CETA is for the climate, for animal welfare and for farmers. Mr. Chairman. The ICS is therefore a court that is only accessible to companies, and in practice it is the large companies. They may sue governments if they consider that they have been mistreated by the relevant authorities, even if that had happened at the level of local authorities, such as municipalities and provinces. They can then file billions of claims. Conversely, governments cannot charge them, either trade unions, environmental organisations or other civil parties. One element that has not yet emerged in the discussion is that the ICS only reviews CETA and its investment protection. An investor who goes to the ICS excludes any review of national laws or treaties, such as human rights treaties or the Paris Climate Convention. Therefore, the ICS-arbiters to be appointed by CETA do not need... No, that does not allow them to balance wider interests, taking into account, for example, the rights of workers or the climate objectives. Those who have devised this must consider the interests of multinationals and their shareholders to be very high. But let us be clear: CETA is largely conceived by and for multinationals and increasing their power and profits. Article 112, first paragraph, of the Constitution provides that the judicial authority is to be entrusted with the trial of disputes concerning civil rights and claims. In spite of this, CETA thus gives direct access to a special court, only for investors, outside our judiciary. Isn't this at least a bad relationship with our own democratic rule of law? I'd like a response from the Minister. According to 20 professors and other lawyers, CETA is even contrary to our Constitution. The Minister will undoubtedly see it differently, but the question to her is how many examples she knows, apart from the ICS and the so-called bilateral \"Investor-State Dispute Settlement\" mechanisms, of international courts to which private parties have direct access without having to go to court first. Is there such a court for workers or for disadvantaged citizens? Or are only multinationals entitled to such privileges? It also affects our legal order and our sovereignty. I'd like a response from the Minister. And the question to the fellow senators is: can a treaty which is seen by so many experts as contrary to our Constitution be accepted? Even if you judge that conflict differently, you have to think three times before you approve a bill that raises such questions about its legality. After all, here is also a core task for us as the First Chamber. The fact that Canadian multinationals, as well as American via Canadian subsidiaries, and their shareholders have direct access to the ICS, so without having to exhaust the national legal process first, makes the road to claims even shorter. In addition, these claims at such a special investor court are expected to be much higher than in our national legal system. I mentioned a similar system in an interruption earlier. That is the Energy Charter, which a majority of the House of Representatives, including D66, is now quite rightly seeking to get rid of, precisely because of the ISDS system. Through this similar treaty, the German energy giants RWE and Uniper have now demanded EUR 2.4 billion for the closure of coal power plants. If that is granted, that money must be coughed up by the taxpayer. And this as a result of democratic policy choices made by the Netherlands. Madness! That is absolutely unacceptable. Does the Minister consider such claims against his own cabinet policy to be normal? I'd like a response. Now, in answering the many questions from this Chamber, the Minister repeatedly points out that there is no reason to expect an increase in claims from Canada based on CETA, but there is no logic here."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2022-07-11-eerstekamer-3.u616", "speech text": "Mr. Chairman. I ended my speech in the first term by saying that this treaty is good for everything that stands for the economy of \"more, more and more\" and that it is very bad for the much-needed transition to a fair, social and sustainable world. I have to say that the Minister's answers merely confirmed that sentence. It does dispute that the objective of CETA is to maximize trade liberalisation, but at the same time it mentions figures that are entirely about the increased volume of trade, more exports and more imports. The Minister also reported very proudly that the EU and the Netherlands have a trade surplus. This means that we have apparently been very successful in exporting to Canada, including the export of more meat. Because exports of meat to Canada have doubled. And if there is one thing we really need to work on, it is meat consumption anyway, if we really want to put the fight against climate change at the centre. Secondly, meat production has a very perverse production chain; I also argued on this point in my first term. That's gotta be different. Unfortunately, we have not heard the Minister, nor have we heard a vision of how it should go. And that while we are in an agricultural crisis here in the Netherlands at the same time. I also found the contribution of the CDA Group very interesting, I must say. He wanted us to believe that agriculture is getting too much attention, because it would only be 5% of exports. But I would like to remind our CDA colleagues that the total share of agriculture within our own gross domestic product is no more than 1.4%, and at the same time that fact has never prevented the CDA from putting a very wrong agricultural policy at the centre. So it is an important point. Nor has the Minister mentioned the question of how to get out of this frozen agricultural system. CETA ensures that farmers simply remain trapped in a production system where they have to produce more for less income. Mr. Chairman. Sustainability agreements are not enforceable. That was confirmed by the Minister. In cases where there is conflict, dispute, the Parties shall consult and seek appropriate measures, taking into account expert advice. That is what Article 24.15 (11) of CETA says. It is therefore not an obligation, not a sanction. Those are just the facts about sustainability. We have also heard a great deal today about the importance of access by NGOs, trade unions and civil society organisations to, for example, grievance mechanisms. I'm okay with that in itself. It's very necessary, too. However, I am struck by how few NGOs, trade unions and civil society organisations that have expressed their concerns about CETA actually hear the advocates in this debate. Mr. Chairman. The Constitution and ICS. In my view, I have tried to clarify what I think the problem is when it comes to interrupting. I would hope that the Minister will come up with a better story in the second term, because as it now stands, especially with the information she has given us, we may be forced to vote in favour of the motion. 'Cause I thought the defense was really weak."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2022-07-12-eerstekamer-2.u46", "speech text": "Thank you, Mr President. It is a good thing that after years of loss, the government wants to strengthen the Dutch military capacity again; better late than never. If you want peace, you must be prepared for war. A sufficiently strong military capacity is a matter of national importance, perhaps the most important national interest. However, there are organisations active in the Netherlands that oppose this. I am talking in particular about organisations that call on pension funds not to invest in companies that produce weapons. As an example, I would like to mention the annual Fair Pension Guide. This publication assesses the policy of the ten largest pension funds in the Netherlands on social issues every year, and one of these themes is whether the fund invests in the arms industry. Pension funds should not do that, the organisers of the Fair Pension Guide think. Then they don't give out enough. Mr. Chairman. A strong defense is in the national interest. Calling pension funds not to invest in defence then goes against the national interest. For the record, anyone in the Netherlands can appeal to matters that go against the national interest; anyone can criticize the government. My group supports the often used saying: I loathe what you say, but I will defend your right to say it with my life. In fact, you could say that it is the ultimate task of our armed forces to ensure that freedom of expression in the Netherlands is not restricted by foreign powers. Many of the organisations that call on pension funds to stay out of the arms industry, receive subsidies and other financial support from the government, mostly through the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. For the past 20 years, that didn't matter much: then the government also felt that you shouldn't invest in defence capabilities. But now such initiatives are contrary to public policy and to national interests. This raises purely in terms of efficiency questions as to whether it is wise for the government to use taxpayers' money to finance organisations that want to change government policy, as approved by parliament. Again, everyone is free to criticize government policy, and I am not talking about funding political parties. I am talking purely about private organisations, which have often started out as charitable organisations, but have become activists in many areas. Once again, they can pursue whatever they want."}, {"speech id": "ParlaMint-NL_2022-07-12-eerstekamer-2.u76", "speech text": "Yes. I come to the questions that have been asked. I'm trying to sort them out a little bit: general questions about security, the Defence Note, then a couple of points about the F-35 and the MQ-9s, and finally perhaps a little bit about the budget. First of all, the whole question of security. Mr Van Apeldoorn, who also spoke on behalf of the Animal Party, outlined the safety dilemma, as he called it. He is, of course, expert in this area, which is why I question his reasoning on that point with some hesitation. Many countries have now decided to invest more in their defence and also in cooperation within the EU and NATO. In some countries, including the Netherlands, but also Germany is an important country at that point.......................................................................................................................................................................... So it is a strengthening that is partly about restoring what you need at least in defence and partly about investing in the armed forces and cooperation within the EU and NATO of the future, mainly in what is needed for a credible deterrent. We have a military force in our defense. We are members of NATO, which is a defensive alliance, a defensive alliance. So it's to prevent us from ever ending up in a war situation. The Netherlands doesn't just do that, but we do that together. So I do not see it as an arms race, but as a necessary investment in weapons and weapons systems to deter them. Terror is only credible when it is actually seen as sufficient. That is what we are aiming for now. Mr Van Apeldoorn then says that I have heard this argument many times, including from others from his party, that NATO invests more money in arms than the Russian Federation and that the Russian economy is smaller than ours. That is all true, but at the same time, unfortunately, because of the current way of warfare of the Russian Federation, we see that this is an aggressor who is unavoidable and does not hesitate to deploy almost the most conceivable conventional weapons, in which human lives do not seem to play a role, either on the military side or on the civilian side, and in which everything that comes on their path is destroyed. In other words, when you talk to people from the Baltic states, for example, they call Irpin and say: we do not want that to be our foreland. That is what we must now stand up to: a real threat of the commitment of everything they have, conventionally. We're gonna have to arm ourselves against that. The second thing I would like to mention on that point is that although NATO was once established because of the Soviet Union, it is not the only threat. Russia, of course, plays a very important role in NATO philosophy. The new Strategic Concept also identifies Russia as a real longer-term threat, but it is not the only threat. We are now seeing, in a sense, a conventional war developing, but of course there is much more. It actually started with some kind of hybrid warfare. There's also a threat in cyber. It happens every day. There's a threat of a war through space. The other threats are also not removed: the threat of terrorism, the threat that can eventually come from things like climate change. So it is much more than the Russian threat, but the Russian threat has been the trigger to rebuild it now and improve it for the future."}]